Strategy for 
New India @ 75
November 2018
iii
I
ndia is on the cusp of a major transformation. Change has been in the making over the last four years. 
The economy is finally moving out of the negative legacies of the past, specially the reckless credit 
expansion. India has regained its position as the fastest growing large economy in the world. This is 
highly commendable. However, to meet the rising aspirations of our young population, India needs to 
achieve and sustain a high rate of GDP growth for the next three decades. There will be several milestones 
in this long and arduous journey. The first of these milestones will be in 2022 when India celebrates the 75th 
anniversary of its independence. The government’s goal is for India to be a USD 4.0 trillion economy when we 
celebrate the platinum jubilee of our independence. 
Moreover, the Prime Minister has given his clarion call for establishing a New India by 2022. The ‘Strategy for 
New India @ 75’ captures three key messages from the Prime Minister. First, development must become a 
mass movement, in which every Indian recognizes her role and also experiences the tangible benefits accruing 
to her in the form of better ease of living. Collective effort and resolve will ensure that we achieve a New India 
by 2022 just like independence was achieved within five years of Mahatma Gandhi giving his call of Quit India 
in 1942. The direct implication of ensuring rapid growth with inclusion is that policymaking will have to be 
rooted in Indian ground realities and emphasize the welfare of all in both design and implementation. 
Second, development strategy should help achieve broad-based economic growth to ensure balanced 
development across all regions and states and across sectors. This implies embracing new technologies 
fostering innovation and upskilling. We will have to focus on the necessary modernization of our agriculture 
and mainstreaming of regions such as the North East, hilly states and the 115 Aspirational Districts. The direct 
outcome of this will be improved regional and inter-personal equity and elimination of dualism that has so 
far characterised our economy. We will put in place an economy that is predominantly formal, rule-driven and 
facilitates investment and innovation.
Third, the strategy when implemented, will bridge the gap between public and private sector performance. 
The Prime Minister has focused on putting in place a ‘development state’ in place of the ‘soft state’ that this 
government had inherited. In this context, the government has focused on the efficient delivery of public 
services, rooting out corruption and black economy, formalizing the economy and expanding the tax base, 
improving the ease of doing business, nursing the stressed commercial banking sector back to a healthy state, 
and stopping leakages through direct benefit transfers and widespread use of the JAM trinity. 
Preface
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
iv
Efficient, transparent and accountable governance has come to be recognized as this government’s USP. This 
will ensure that India will not only achieve its ambitious goals for 2022, but also go on to become one of the 
two largest economies in the world by 2047, when we celebrate the centenary of our independence. 
‘Strategy for New India @ 75’ has identified 41 different areas that require either a sharper focus on 
implementing the flagship schemes already in place or a new design and initiative to achieve India’s true 
potential. Each chapter summarizes the current status of the sector, takes full cognizance of the progress 
made thus far and spells out the objectives. It then identifies the binding constraints and proposes measures 
to address these constraints. It is our hope that this new approach will provide an inventory of readily 
implementable measures for the government departments and agencies both in the central and state 
governments. The focus of the strategy is to further improve the policy environment in which private investors 
and other stakeholders can contribute their fullest towards achieving the goals set out for New India 2022. 
We have followed a deeply participative approach in preparing the strategy. The process started with a series 
of consultations with all possible stakeholders. Each area vertical in NITI Aayog had in depth consultations 
with all three groups of stakeholders, viz., business persons, academics including scientists, and government 
officials. This was followed by consultations held by NITI Aayog with seven sets of stakeholders that included 
scientists and innovators, farmers, civil society organizations, think tanks, labour representatives and trade 
unions, as well as industry representatives (Lists at Annex 1 and 2).  
Each chapter draft was sent to the respective line ministry for their inputs, suggestions and comments. 
The completed draft document was circulated to all the States and Union Territories. As many as 23 States 
and 4 Union Territories sent detailed and well considered comments and suggestions. These have helped 
in improving the draft by reflecting state specific features in various chapters. This exercise has further 
strengthened NITI Aayog’s efforts at cooperative federalism. It will also encourage us to collaborate with the 
states to develop state specific development blueprints.
With these extensive consultations and inputs, the strategy reflects ground realities and a collective consensus 
on addressing the challenges and achieving the goals for a New India. The attempt is to present a set of ideas 
that can provide the basis for a constructive public-private-personal partnership and promote centre-state 
cooperation. We hope that the document will also help to build the trust required among all stakeholders for 
making development into a mass movement. 
I would like to thank NITI Aayog members Dr. V . K. Saraswat, Dr. Ramesh Chand and Dr. Vinod K. Paul for their 
leadership and invaluable inputs at every stage of the process. This document would not have been possible 
v
without the contribution of NITI Aayog CEO, Amitabh Kant and senior officials of NITI Aayog. I would like to 
thank Additional Secretaries Yaduvendra Mathur and R. P . Gupta; Senior Advisers Sunita Sanghi and Srikara 
Naik; Advisers Alok Kumar, Anil Srivastava, Anna Roy, Ashok K. Jain, J. P . Mishra, Jitendra Kumar, Maninder 
Kaur Dwivedi, Praveen Mahto, Ravinder Goyal, S. S. Ganapathy, U. K. Sharma, Vikram Singh Gaur, Yogesh Suri; 
Senior Consultants C. Muralikrishna Kumar, Rakesh Ranjan and Sujeet Samaddar and Officer on Special Duty 
Sanyukta Samaddar. 
This task would not have been completed without the help of a dedicated team of experts attached to the 
Vice Chairman’s office, led by Ramgopal Agarwala and Dhiraj Nayyar. The team consisted of Urvashi Prasad, 
Ranveer Nagaich, Devashish Dhar, Atisha Kumar, Chinmaya Goyal, Vaibhav Kapoor and Ajit Pai. Tara Nair 
provided crucial editing inputs. 
Preparing the strategy is only the first step towards India’s economic transformation. The foresighted framers of 
our celebrated Constitution have set the enormous challenge of simultaneously completing India’s triple transition 
across social, political and economic fields. India is one of the very few countries that have taken on this historical 
challenge of completing the three transitions together. Having successfully taken forward the social and political 
transitions, India is now within sight of completing its economic transition as well. This will see per capita incomes 
rising from about USD 1,900 in 2017-18 to around USD 3,000 in 2022-23. As outlined in this Strategy Document, 
successfully completing our economic transition will enable us to achieve freedom from squalor, illiteracy, 
corruption, poverty, malnutrition and poor connectivity for the common Indian. 
By 2022, New India will provide a solid foundation for clean, inclusive, sustained and sustainable growth for 
the next three decades. The ‘Strategy for New India @ 75’ reflects our preparedness to make this transition. Its 
recommendations are practical and detailed to facilitate time-bound implementation. All levels of government 
must work together to achieve the vision of New India. Working together as ‘Team India’ will ensure prosperity 
for all while protecting our environment and promoting the emergence of an innovative eco-system, propelling 
India to the front ranks of the global economy. 
Dr. Rajiv Kumar
Vice Chairman 
NITI Aayog

vii
Introduction 1
Drivers  
1. Growth 7
2. Employment and Labour Reforms 12
3. Technology and Innovation 16
4. Industry  20
5. Doubling Farmers’ Income (I): Modernizing Agriculture 25
6. Doubling Farmers’ Income (II): Policy & Governance 30
7. Doubling Farmers’ Income (III): Value Chain & Rural Infrastructure 36
8. Financial Inclusion 41
9. Housing for All 45
10. Travel, Tourism and Hospitality 49
11. Minerals  54
Infrastructure
12. Energy 61
13. Surface Transport 66
14. Railways 70
15. Civil Aviation 75
16. Ports, Shipping and Inland Waterways 80
17. Logistics 85
18. Digital Connectivity 88
19. Smart Cities for Urban Transformation 92
20. Swachh Bharat Mission 96
21. Water Resources 100
22. Sustainable Environment 104
Inclusion
23. School Education 111
Table of Contents
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
viii
24. Higher Education 116
25. Teacher Education and Training 121
26. Skill Development 124
27. Public Health Management and Action 129
28. Comprehensive Primary Health Care 133
29. Human Resources for Health 137
30. Universal Health Coverage 142
31. Nutrition 146
32. Gender 150
33. Senior Citizens, Persons with Disability and Transgender Persons 155
34. Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs), Other Backward Classes (OBCs),  
  Other Tribal Groups and Minorities 161
Governance
35. Balanced Regional Development: Transforming Aspirational Districts 169
36. The North-East Region 173
37. Legal, Judicial and Police Reforms 178
38. Civil Services Reforms 183
39. Modernizing City Governance for Urban Transformation 187
40. Optimizing the Use of Land Resources 191
41. Data Led Governance and Policy Making 195
Annex 1 199
Annex 2 205
Table of Contents
ix
List of Figures
1.1 India’s real GDP growth 8
2.1  Share of workforce employed in agriculture 13
3.1  Steps taken to promote science, technology and innovation in India 16
4.1  Manufacturing as a share of GDP , 2011-12 to 2017-18 21
6.1  Price spread between farm harvest prices and retail prices for select agricultural   
commodities, 2015-16 31
7.1  Additional markets required by 2022-23 36
8.1  Distribution of household savings across physical and financial assets 42
8.2  Growth in unified payment interface (UPI) usage 42
9.1  Multi-pronged approach to resolving constraints in the ‘Housing for All’ scheme 46
10.1  Contribution of travel and tourism in India, 2016 49
11.1  India’s share in world production, 2015 55
12.1  Strategies for improving the energy sector in India 63
13.1  Total number of registered vehicles in India 66
14.1  Growth of Indian Railways,1950-51 to 2013-14 71
15.1  Passenger traffic by scheduled carriers, 2007-08 to 2016-17 75
15.2  Freight Transported by air, 2007-08 to 2016-17 76
16.1  Operating cost comparison in transporting cargo through various modes 81
16.2  Pillars of the Sagarmala programme 81
18.1  Increase in internet users and online penetration in India 88
19.1 Four paradigms to leverage Smart Cities Mission 93
20.1  Improvement in Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) coverage 97
21.1  Status on average annual water availability 100
22.1  Strategies for achieving sustainable environment 105
23.1  Gross and net enrolment ratios for elementary, secondary and senior secondary 111
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
x
List of Figures
23.2  Learning outcomes from ASER survey 2016 for rural areas 112
24.1  Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher education, 2016-17 117
24.2  UGC’s graded autonomy regulations for universities 118
26.1  Workforce that has undergone formal skill training 125
27.1  Preventable risk factors are the biggest contributors to the disease burden, 2016 130
28.1  Additional services to be provided under the New India primary care system  134
28.2  Revamped primary health system for New India  135
29.1  Shortfall of specialists in government health centres compared to the  
requirement based on existing infrastructure  138
29.2  Sanctioned posts of specialists vacant 138
30.1  Pillars of universal health coverage  143
31.1  Key nutritional indicators in India 146
32.1  Progress with respect to gender-related indicators 150
32.2   Female labour force participation 151
32.3  Examples of indicators that could be used for developing the gender-based  
index and ranking states 153
33.1  School attendance of children with disabilities between 5-19 years  156
33.2  Literacy status of PwDs 157
33.3  Allocation and expenditure pertaining to the Department of Empowerment of  
Persons with Disabilities 157
34.1  Workforce participation rate 164
34.2  Out of school children by religious group  165
35.1  Illustration of how the ADP converges stakeholders’ efforts in the prevention of stunting 171
36.1  Per capita NSDP for north-east states, 2015-16 173
36.2  Per capita NSDP for north-east states, 2004-05 174
xi
List of Tables
List of Figures
36.3  Timeline of government initiatives for the development of north-east region 175
39.1  Key strategies to improve urban governance by 2022-23 188
40.1  Land use across different uses in India, 1990-91 to 2013-14 191
41.1  Framework for achieving transparent governance 197
7.1 Gaps in cold-chain development 37
23.1  Profile of public schools with low enrolment 114
34.1  Incidence of poverty across social groups  161
34.2 Literacy rate among social groups 162
34.3  Literacy Rate among minority communities 164
35.1  Core dimensions of ADP and their weightage 171
1
O
n August 15, 2022, independent India will turn 75. In the lifespan of nations, India is still young. 
The best is surely yet to come. India’s youthful and aspirational population deserves a rapid 
transformation of the economy, which can deliver double-digit growth, jobs and prosperity to all. 
A strong foundation has been laid in the last four years. While there is every room for confidence, 
there is none for complacency. A surge of energy, untiring effort and an unshakeable resolve on the part of the 
government, private sector and every individual citizen can achieve this transformation in the next five years. 
Seventy years ago, similar energy, effort and resolve from all Indians freed the country from colonial rule within 
five years of the launch of the Quit India movement in 1942. Then, like now, foundations had been laid but a 
committed acceleration of effort was necessary. The Prime Minister’s call for Sankalp Se Siddhi is a clarion call 
for a radical transformation for a New India by 2022-23. 
The government has to be in the vanguard of the transformation of the Indian economy. However, the 
government’s role must be defined correctly. This Strategy document attempts to do this. The document is 
being framed in a context where a re-imagination of governance is taking place. We need a ‘development 
state’ that focuses sharply on the difficult and accountable delivery of key public goods and services. There is 
an ongoing effort to achieve an optimum level of public-private partnership. Policies have been put in place 
for more efficient delivery of public goods and services such as health, education, power, urban water supply 
and connectivity. In this context, a deliberate effort is being made to cut red tape and end burdensome over-
regulation for promoting entrepreneurship and private investment. Also, in an effort to align the ‘Strategy 
for New India @ 75’ with India’s commitment to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, each 
chapter is mapped to the relevant goals.  India is currently putting in place a ‘development state’ guided by the 
philosophy of 
Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas.
The purpose of this document, ‘Strategy for New India @ 75’, is to define clear objectives for 2022-23 in a 
diverse range of 41 areas that recognize the progress already made; and challenges that remain; identify 
binding constraints in specific sectors; and suggest the way forward for achieving the stated objectives.
The Strategy document has disaggregated the 41 sectors under four sections: drivers, infrastructure, 
inclusion and governance. The first section on drivers focuses on the engines of economic performance – in 
macroeconomic terms with chapters on growth and employment. The section also discusses strategies for 
the doubling of farmers’ incomes; boosting Make in India; upgrading the science, technology and innovation 
eco-system; and promoting sunrise sectors like fintech and tourism. An annual rate of growth of 9 per cent 
Introduction
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
2
by 2022-23 is essential for generating sufficient jobs and achieving prosperity for all. Four key steps, among 
others have been spelled out for achieving this GDP growth rate. These are:
a. Increase the investment rate as measured by gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) from present 29 per 
cent to 36 per cent of GDP by 2022. About half of this increase must come from public investment 
which is slated to increase from 4 per cent to 7 per cent of GDP. Government savings have to move into 
positive territory. This sharp increase in investment-to-GDP ratio will require significantly higher resource 
mobilization efforts as elaborated in the chapter on Growth.
b. In agriculture, emphasis must shift to converting farmers to ‘agripreneurs’ by further expanding 
e-National Agriculture Markets (e-NAMs) and replacing the Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee 
(APMC) Act with the Agricultural Produce and Livestock Marketing (APLM) Act. The creation of a unified 
national market, a freer export regime and abolition of the Essential Commodities Act are essential for 
boosting agricultural growth. 
c. A strong push would be given to ‘Zero Budget Natural Farming’ (ZBNF) techniques that reduce costs, 
improve land quality and increase farmers’ incomes. This is a tested method for putting environment 
carbon back into the land. Therefore, ZBNF allows India to significantly contribute to reducing the global 
carbon footprint.
d. To ensure maximum employment creation, codification of labour laws must be completed and a massive 
effort must be made to upscale apprenticeships. 
The second section on infrastructure deals with the physical foundations of growth. A lot of progress has been 
made across all infrastructure sectors. This is crucial to enhancing the competitiveness of Indian business as 
also ensuring the citizens’ ease of living. Three key steps, among others, are:
a. Expediting the establishment of the Rail Development Authority (RDA), which is already approved. RDA 
will advise or make informed decisions on an integrated, transparent and dynamic pricing mechanism 
for the railways. Investment in railways will be ramped up, including by monetising existing railway 
assets. 
b. The share of freight transported by coastal shipping and inland waterways will be doubled. Initially, 
viability gap funding will be provided until the infrastructure is fully developed. An IT-enabled platform 
would be developed for integrating different modes of transport and promoting multi-modal and 
digitised mobility.
c. With the completion of the 
Bharat Net programme in 2019, all 2.5 lakh gram panchayats will be digitally 
connected. In the next phase the last mile connectivity to the individual villages will be completed. The 
aim will be to deliver all government services at the state, district, and gram panchayat level digitally by 
2022-23, thereby eliminating the digital divide.
3
The section on inclusion deals with the urgent task of investing in the capabilities of all of India’s citizens. The 
three themes in this section revolve around the various dimensions of health, education and mainstreaming 
of traditionally marginalized sections of the population. While there are multiple dimensions and pathways 
contained in the chapters in this section, four key steps, among others, are:
a. Successfully implementing the Ayushman Bharat programme including the establishment of 150,000 
health and wellness centres across the country, and rolling out the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Abhiyaan.
b. Upgrading the quality of the school education system and skills, including the creation of a new 
innovation ecosystem at the ground level by establishing at least 10,000 Atal Tinkering Labs by 2020.
c. As already done in rural areas, affordable housing in urban areas will be given a huge push to improve 
workers’ living conditions and ensure equity while providing a strong impetus to economic growth.
d. Implementing strategies to achieve regional equity by focusing on the North-East region and successfully 
rolling out the Aspirational Districts Programme.
The final section on governance delves deep into how the tasks/business of government can be streamlined 
and reformed to achieve better outcomes. It involves a sharp focus on ensuring accountability and a shift to 
performance-based evaluation. The government will revamp its data systems and analysis so that all policy 
interventions and decision-making are based on evidence and real-time data. This will yield efficient and 
targeted delivery of services and justice to those who need them the most. Three key steps, among others, are: 
a. Implementing the recommendations of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission as a prelude 
to appointing a successor for designing reforms in the changing context of emerging technologies and 
growing complexity of the economy.
b. A new autonomous body, viz., the Arbitration Council of India, may be set up to grade arbitral 
institutions and accredit arbitrators to make the arbitration process cost effective and speedy, and to pre-
empt the need for court intervention. 
c. The scope of 
Swachh Bharat Mission may be expanded to cover initiatives for landfills, plastic waste and 
municipal waste and generating wealth from waste. 
To achieve the goals of New India in 2022-23, it is important for the private sector, civil society and even 
individuals to draw up their own strategies to complement and supplement the steps the government intends 
to take. With the available tools of 21st century technology, it should be possible to truly create a mass 
movement for development. With the 
Sankalp of all Indians, India will have Siddhi.
DRIVERS
7
Objectives
• Steadily accelerate the gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth rate to achieve a target of about 
8 per cent during 2018-23 (note that this target 
has been set to catalyse policy action and 
does not represent a forecast). This will raise 
the economy’s size in real terms from USD 2.7 
trillion in 2017-18 to nearly USD 4 trillion by 
2022-23. Besides having rapid growth, which 
reaches 9-10 per cent by 2022-23, it is also 
necessary to ensure that growth is inclusive, 
sustained, clean and formalized.
• The investment rate should be raised from 29 
per cent to 36 per cent of GDP which has been 
achieved in the past, by 2022-23.
• Exports of goods and services combined should 
be increased from USD 478 billion in 2017-18 
to USD 800 billion by 2022-23.
Current Situation
Economic growth in India has been broadly on 
an accelerating path. It is likely to be the fastest 
growing major economy in the world in the 
medium-term. 
The share of manufacturing in India’s GDP is low 
relative to the average in low and middle-income 
countries. It has not increased in any significant 
measure in the quarter century after economic 
liberalization began in 1991. Within manufacturing, 
growth has often been highest in sectors that are 
relatively capital intensive, such as automobiles and 
pharmaceuticals. This stems from India’s inability to 
capitalize fully on its inherent labour and skill cost 
advantages to develop large-scale labour intensive 
manufacturing. Complex land and labour laws have 
also played a notable part in this outcome. There 
is a need to increase the pace of generating good 
quality jobs to cater to the growing workforce, their 
rising aspirations and to absorb out-migration of 
labour from agriculture. 
The positive news is that high growth rate has been 
achieved with strong macroeconomic fundamentals 
including low and stable rates of inflation and 
a falling fiscal deficit. However, along with 
macroeconomic stability, the sufficient condition for 
escalating growth is to continue with the structural 
reforms that address the binding constraints for a 
more robust supply-side response. 
Constraints 
Overall, growth can be accelerated by a number 
of measures across different policy areas, which 
have been detailed in different chapters of this 
strategy for 2022-23. This chapter focuses on the 
macroeconomic drivers of growth.
Way Forward
1. Raising investment rates to 36 per cent by 
2022-23
• To raise the rate of investment (gross fixed 
capital formation as a share of GDP) from about 
29 per cent in 2017-18 to about 36 per cent 
of GDP by 2022-23, a slew of measures will 
be required to boost both private and public 
investment.
1. Growth 

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
8
Figure 1.1: India’s real GDP growth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Real GDP Growth (%) 
• India’s tax-GDP ratio of around 17 per cent 
is half the average of OECD countries (35 
per cent) and is low even when compared to 
other emerging economies like Brazil (34 per 
cent), South Africa (27 per cent) and China 
(22 per cent). To enhance public investment, 
India should aim to increase its tax-GDP 
ratio to at least 22 per cent of GDP by 2022-
23. Demonetization and GST will contribute 
positively to this critical effort. In addition, 
efforts need to be made to rationalize direct 
taxes for both corporate tax and personal 
income tax. Simultaneously, there is a need to 
ease the tax compliance burden and eliminate 
direct interface between taxpayers and tax 
officials using technology.
• In 2016-17, the share of government (central 
and state combined) capital expenditure in 
total budget expenditure was 16.2 per cent,
1  
and government’s contribution to fixed capital 
formation was close to 4 per cent of GDP . This 
needs to be increased to at least 7 per cent of 
GDP by 2022-23 through greater orientation 
of expenditure towards productive assets, and 
minimizing the effective revenue deficit. 
•  States could also undertake greater mobilization 
of own taxes such as property tax, and taking 
specific steps to improve administration of GST 
to increase tax collections.
• Two areas in which higher public investment 
will easily be absorbed are housing and 
infrastructure. Investment in housing, 
especially in urban areas, will create very large 
multiplier effects in the economy. Investment 
in physical infrastructure will address long-
standing deficiencies faced by the economy. 
Sector-specific measures are mentioned in 
corresponding chapters.
• The government has taken significant measures 
to attract foreign direct investment by easing 
caps on the extent of permissible stake holding 
Source: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
9
and the norms of approval. By 2022-23, the 
government may consider further liberalizing 
FDI norms across sectors. Domestic savings 
can be complemented by attracting foreign 
investment in bonds and government securities. 
Regulatory limits can be relaxed for rupee 
denominated debt.  
• The government should continue to exit central 
public sector enterprises (CPSEs) that are not 
strategic in nature. Inefficient CPSEs surviving 
on government support distort entire sectors 
as they operate without any real budget 
constraints. The government’s exit will attract 
private investment and contribute to the 
exchequer, enabling higher public investment. 
For larger CPSEs, the goal should be to create 
widely held companies by offloading stake to 
the public to create entities where no single 
promoter has control. This will both improve 
management efficiency and allow government 
to monetize its holdings with substantial 
contribution to public finances.
• Private investment needs be encouraged in 
infrastructure through a renewed public-private 
partnership (PPP) mechanism on the lines 
suggested by the Kelkar Committee.
2. Macroeconomic stability through prudent 
fiscal and monetary policies
• Sustained high growth requires macroeconomic 
stability, which is being achieved through a 
combination of prudent fiscal and monetary 
policies.
• The government has targeted a gradual 
lowering of the government debt-to-GDP ratio. 
It will help reduce the relatively high interest 
cost burden on the government budget, bring 
the size of India’s government debt closer to 
that of other emerging market economies, and 
improve the availability of credit for the private 
sector in the financial markets.  
• But even as lowering of debt and limiting fiscal 
deficit are important, the government should 
be flexible in its approach towards setting 
annual targets based on prevailing economic 
conditions. This approach is enshrined in 
the existing Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management (FRBM) architecture that has built 
in flexibility in the form of adequately defined 
“escape and buoyancy” clauses. Targets should 
take cognizance of the stage of the business 
cycle and fiscal deficit and borrowing targets 
should not be set in isolation.
• The effective revenue deficit should be 
brought down as rapidly as possible. Capital 
expenditure incurred for the health and 
education sectors, which in effect builds 
human capital, should be excluded from 
estimates of revenue expenditure. This will 
increase government savings.  
• One of the major institutional reforms of recent 
years has been to statutely mandate the RBI 
to maintain “... price stability while keeping in 
mind the objective of growth”. Inflation needs 
to be contained within the stated target range 
of 2 per cent to 6 per cent. Inflation targeting 
provides a reasonably flexible policy framework 
which is in line with global best practices and 
can respond appropriately to supply shocks. 
• Policy should be directed to minimize volatility 
in the nominal exchange rate. 
3. Efficient financial intermediation
• Efficient functioning of the financial markets is 
crucial to maintain high growth in the economy. 
There is a need to deepen financial markets 
with easier availability of capital, greater use 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
10
of financial markets to channel savings and 
an improved risk-assessment framework for 
lending to avoid a situation of large-scale non-
performing assets in the banking sector.
• Governance reforms in public sector banks require, 
apart from the establishment of independent and 
commercially driven bank boards, performance 
assessment of executives and increased flexibility 
in human resources policy. 
• The Gujarat International Finance and Tech 
City (GIFT) should be leveraged to push the 
envelope on financial sector liberalization. It 
is an opportunity to onshore trading in rupees 
and other derivatives, which currently happens 
outside India for regulatory reasons. If GIFT 
succeeds, liberalization can be extended to the 
rest of the country.
• Enable alternative (to banks) sources of credit 
for India’s long-term investment needs. 
The bond market needs deepening through 
liberalization of regulations and continued fiscal 
consolidation.
4. Focus on exports and manufacturing
• India needs to remain globally competitive, 
particularly in the production and exports of 
manufactured, including processed agricultural, 
goods. The following reforms would help in 
improving the competitiveness:
o A focused effort on making the logistics 
sector more efficient is needed. 
o Power tariff structures may be rationalized 
to ensure global competitiveness of Indian 
industries.
o  Import tariffs that seek to promote 
indigenous industry should come with 
measures to raise productivity which will 
provide the ability to compete globally.
• Improve connectivity by accelerating the 
completion of announced infrastructure 
projects. Enhancing physical connectivity will 
help reduce delivery times and improve global 
connectivity and the reach of our exporters. By 
2022-23, we should complete projects that are 
already underway such as the Delhi-Mumbai 
Industrial Corridor (DMIC) and Dedicated Freight 
Corridors.
• Work with states to ease labour and land 
regulations. In particular, we should introduce 
flexibility in labour provisions across sectors. All 
state governments should speedily implement 
fixed term employment (FTE) that has now been 
extended to cover all sectors.
•  The government has recently established 
a dedicated fund of INR 5,000 crore for 
enhancing 12 “Champion Services Sectors”. 
Among others, these include IT & ITeS, tourism, 
medical value travel and audio visual services. 
Given the significant role of services exports in 
maintaining India’s balance of payments, the 
government should continue to focus on these 
sectors.
• Strengthen the governance and technical 
capabilities of Export Promotion Councils 
(EPCs) by subjecting them to a well-defined, 
performance-based evaluation. Performance 
evaluations of EPCs could be based on 
increasing the share of Indian exports in 
product markets covered by these EPCs. Those 
EPCs unable to achieve mutually agreed upon 
targets for increasing market shares could be 
closed down or re-structured.
• Explore closer economic integration within 
South Asia and the emerging economies of 
South East Asia particularly Cambodia, Laos, 
Myanmar and Vietnam, using the existing 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal (BBIN) and 
11
the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral 
Technical and Economic Co-operation (BIMSTEC) 
frameworks. 
o Building the physical infrastructure and 
putting in place measures to facilitate 
seamless cross-border movement of 
goods in the North-East region would 
help accelerate integration and promote 
exports.
5. Employment generation
• The necessary condition for employment 
generation is economic growth. Achieving 
the growth targets by implementing the 
development strategy outlined in this document 
can generate sufficient jobs for new entrants 
into the labour force, as well as those migrating 
out of agriculture. A large part of jobs would 
hopefully be generated in labour-intensive 
manufacturing sectors, construction and 
services. In addition, the employability of labour 
needs to be enhanced by improving health, 
education and skilling outcomes and a massive 
expansion of the apprenticeship scheme.
________________________________________
1 Source: RBI.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
12
Objectives
• Complete codification of central labour laws 
into four codes by 2019.
• Increase female labour force participation to at 
least 30 per cent by 2022-23.
• Disseminate publicly available data, collected 
through rigorous household and enterprise 
surveys and innovative use of administrative 
data on a quarterly basis by 2022-23.
• Encourage increased formalization of the labour 
force by reforming labour laws, easing of 
industrial relations and ensuring of fair wages, 
working conditions and social security through 
significant productivity improvements in the 
economy.
Current Situation 
To capitalize on its demographic dividend, India 
must create well-paying, high productivity jobs. Of 
India’s total workforce of about 52 crore, agriculture 
employed nearly 49 per cent while contributing 
only 15 per cent of the GVA. Comprehensive 
modernization of agriculture and allied sectors are 
needed urgently. In contrast, only about 29 per cent 
of China’s workforce was employed in agriculture 
(Figure 2.1).1  Industry and services accounted 
for 13.7 and 37.5 per cent of employment while 
making up for 23 per cent and 62 per cent of GVA, 
respectively.
2  
A significant number of workers, currently employed 
in agriculture, will move out in search of jobs in 
other areas. This will be in addition to the new 
entrants to the labour force as a result of population 
growth. By some estimates, the Indian economy 
will need to generate nearly 70 lakh jobs annually 
to absorb the net addition to the workforce. Taking 
into account the shift of labour force from low 
productivity employment, 80-90 lakhs new jobs will 
be needed in the coming years.  
Micro and small-sized firms as well as informal 
sector firms dominate the employment landscape 
in India. As per the National Sample Survey (NSS) 
73rd round, for the period 2015-16, there were 
6.34 crore unincorporated non-agricultural micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in the 
country engaged in different economic activities 
providing employment to 11.10 crore workers. A 
large majority of these firms are in the unorganized 
sector. By some estimates, India’s informal sector 
employs approximately 85 per cent of all workers.
3 
India also exhibits a low and declining female 
labour force participation rate. The female labour 
force participation rate in India was 23.7 per cent in 
2011-124  compared to 61 per cent in China, 56 per 
cent in the United States.5  
Recognizing the high cost of compliance with 
existing labour regulations and the complexity 
generated by various labour laws at the central 
and state levels, the central government has 
recently introduced policies to make compliance 
easier and more effective. They are also simplifying 
and rationalizing the large and often overlapping 
2. Employment and Labour Reforms
13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49% 
29% 
14.50% 
4.60% 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
India China Brazil South Africa
Share of Workforce Employed in 
Agriculture (%) 
Figure 2.1: Share of workforce employed in agriculture
Source: NSSO; World Bank
number of labour laws. These measures include 
moving licensing and compliance processes 
online, simplifying procedures and permitting 
self-certification in larger number of areas. One of 
the government’s key initiatives is to rationalize 38 
central labour laws into four codes, namely wages, 
safety and working conditions, industrial relations, 
and social security and welfare. Of the four codes, 
the one on wages has been introduced in the Lok 
Sabha and is under examination. The other three 
codes are at the pre-legislative consultation stage 
and should be completed urgently.
The government has put in place several schemes 
to help generate employment. These include the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), MUDRA Yojana, 
Prime Minister’s Employment Generation 
Programme and Pradhan Mantri Rojgar Protsahan 
Yojana. Additional initiatives aid job creation 
through providing skill development, easing access 
to credit and addressing sector specific constraints. 
The government also made the EPFO premium 
portable so that workers can change jobs without 
fear of losing their provident fund benefits. 
The government has recently made publicly 
available the data on employment collected by the 
Employment Provident Fund Organization (EPFO), 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
and National Pension Scheme (NPS). With MOSPI 
collecting employment data through its enterprises 
and household surveys – particularly the Periodic 
Labour Force Survey – and the focus on improving 
payroll data, the effort is to vastly improve 
availability of reliable employment data and release 
it on a regular basis. 
Constraints
• Productivity across all sectors. A large 
share of India’s workforce is employed in 
low productivity activities with low levels of 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
14
remuneration. This is especially true of the 
informal sector where wages can be one 
twentieth of those in firms producing the same 
goods or services but in the formal sector.6 
• Protection and social security. A large number 
of workers that are engaged in the unorganized 
sector are not covered by labour regulations 
and social security. This dualistic nature of the 
labour market in India may be a result of the 
complex and large number of labour laws that 
make compliance very costly. In 2016, there 
were 44 labour laws under the statute of the 
central government. More than 100 laws fall 
under the jurisdiction of state governments.
7  
The multiplicity and complexity of laws makes 
compliance and enforcement difficult.
• Skills. According to the India Skill Report 2018, 
only 47 per cent of those coming out of higher 
educational institutions are employable.
8 
• Employment data. We currently lack timely 
and periodic estimates of the work force. 
This lack of data prevents us from rigorously 
monitoring the employment situation and 
assessing the impact of various interventions to 
create jobs.
Way Forward
1. Enhance skills and apprenticeships
• The Labour Market Information System (LMIS) 
is important for identifying skill shortages, 
training needs and employment created. The 
LMIS should be made functional urgently.
• Ensure the wider use of apprenticeship 
programmes by all enterprises. This may require 
an enhancement of the stipend amount paid 
by the government for sharing the costs of 
apprenticeships with employers.  
2. Labour law reforms
• Complete the codification of labour laws at the 
earliest. 
• Simplify and modify labour laws applicable 
to the formal sector to introduce an optimum 
combination of flexibility and security.
• Make the compliance of working conditions 
regulations more effective and transparent. 
• The National Policy for Domestic Workers 
needs to be brought in at the earliest to 
recognize their rights and promote better 
working conditions.
3. Enhance female labour force participation
• Ensure the implementation of and employers’ 
adherence to the recently passed Maternity 
Benefit (Amendment) Act, 2017, and the 
Sexual Harassment of Women at Work Place 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act. It is 
also important to ensure implementation of these 
legislations in the informal sector. Further details 
may be found in the chapter on Gender.
• Ensure that skills training programmes and 
apprenticeships include women.
4. Improve data collection on employment
• Ensure that data collection for the Periodic 
Labour Force Survey (PFLS) of households 
initiated in April 2017 is completed as per 
schedule and data disseminated by 2019.
• Conduct an annual enterprise survey using the 
goods and service tax network (GSTN) as the 
sample frame. 
• Increase the use of administrative data viz. 
EPFO, ESIC and the NPS to track regularly the 
state of employment while adjusting for the 
formalization of the workforce.
15
5. Ease industrial relations to encourage  
formalization
• Increase severance pay, in line with global best 
practices.
• Overhaul the labour dispute resolution system 
to resolve disputes quickly, efficiently, fairly and 
at low cost. 
• Strengthen labour courts/tribunals for timely 
dispute resolution and set a time frame for 
different disputes.
6. Wages
• Make compliance with the national floor level 
minimum wage mandatory.
• Expand the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, to 
cover all jobs. 
• Enforce the payment of wages through cheque 
or 
Aadhaar-enabled payments for all.
7. Working conditions and social security
• Enact a comprehensive occupational health and 
safety legislation based on risk assessment, 
employer-worker co-operation, and effective 
educational, remedial and sanctioning. Workers 
housing on site will help to improve global 
competitiveness of Indian industry, along with 
enhancing workers’ welfare.
• Enhance occupational safety and health (OSH) 
in the informal sector through capacity building 
and targeted programmes. 
• Ensure compulsory registration of all 
establishments to ensure better monitoring of 
occupational safety as well as recreation and 
sanitation facilities. 
•  Enhance transparency in the labour inspection 
system by allowing online complaints and 
putting in place a standardized and clear 
mechanism.
________________________________________
1 2017 OECD Economic Survey of India; NSSO.
2 Sectoral Contribution to GVA calculated using data from MOSPI’s Second Advance Estimates. Industry consists of manufacturing, 
mining and quarrying and electricity, gas, water supply& other utility services. The services sector consists of trade, hotels, transport, 
communication and services related to broadcasting; construction; financial, real estate and professional services; and public admin-
istration, defence and other services.
3 OECD India Policy Brief, Education and Skills. Accessed May 15, 2018.
 https://www.oecd.org/policy-briefs/India-Improving-Quality-of-Education-and-Skills-Development.pdf.
4 NSSO 68th Round (2011-12). Female labour force participation rate calculated using usual principal status, covering both urban and 
rural areas.
5 World Development Indicators database, World Bank. Accessed May 16, 2018.
6 Data from Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) and NSS, cited in the Annual Economic Survey, 2015-16
 http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2015-16/echapvol1-10.pdf. Accessed May 15, 2018.
7 Ministry of Labour and Employment, India.
 http://labour.nic.in/about-ministry. Accessed May 15, 2018.
8 India Skill Report 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
16
Objectives
• India should be among the top 50 countries in 
the Global Innovation Index by 2022-23.1 
• Five of our scientific research institutions should 
be amongst the top 100 in the world.
• India should aim to spend at least 2 per cent 
of gross domestic product (GDP) on R&D with 
equal contributions from the public and private 
sector.
Current Situation
Recognizing the crucial role of technology and inno-
vation in economic development, India’s policy mak-
ers have taken several initiatives to promote science, 
technology and innovation (see figure below).
Various schemes have been launched to attract, 
nurture and retain young researchers and women 
scientists in the field of scientific research. Some 
important achievements in the field of science and 
technology are enumerated below.
3. Technology and Innovation
   
 
   
 
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION 
OBJECTIVE:  
By 2022-23: 
 India should be among the top 50 countries in the Global Innovation Index.i 
 Ten of our scientific research institutions should be amongst the top 100 in the world. 
 India should aim to spend at least 2 per cent of gross domestic product ( GDP) on R&D with 
equal contributions from the public and private sector. 
 
CURRENT SITUATION  
Recognizing the crucial role of technology and innovation in economic development, India’s policy 
makers have taken several initiatives over the last decade and a half to promote science, technology 
and innovation (see figure below): 
Figure 1: Steps taken to promote science, technology and innovation in India 
 
 
Various schemes have been launched to attract, nurture and retain young researchers and women 
scientists in the field of scientific research.  Some important achievements in the field of science and 
technology are enumerated below: 
 First, India has become a major destination for outsourced R&D activities. We currently have 
more than 1,100  R&D centres set up by multi-national companies (MNCs) such as IBM, 
Google, Microsoft, Intel, Lupin, Wockhardt, etc.  These R&D centres cover areas including 
1971 
Department of Science and 
Technology established. 
Promotes basic research 
via: 
• Research funding schemes 
through Science and 
Engineering Research 
Board (SERB) and other 
in-house programmes 
• Autonomous Institutions 
(AIs) under DST were set 
up 
2000 
National 
Innovation 
Foundation  was 
set up to fund 
grassroots 
innovations 
2003 
Science and 
Technology 
Policy brought 
together Science 
and Technology 
2013 
Science, 
Technology and 
Innovation (STI) 
Policy formulated. 
 
2016 
Atal Innovation 
Mission 
launched 
Figure 3.1: Steps taken to promote science, technology and innovation in India

17
• India has become a major destination for 
outsourced R&D activities. We currently have 
more than 1,100 R&D centres set up by multi-
national companies (MNCs) such as IBM, Google, 
Microsoft, Intel, Lupin, Wockhardt, etc. These 
R&D centres cover areas including information 
and communication technologies, biotechnology, 
and aerospace, automotive, chemicals and 
materials technology. India’s relatively strong 
intellectual property regime will facilitate its 
emergemce as a major R&D centre.
• Indian scientists are at the forefront of some 
global groundbreaking work. Recent contribu-
tions by Indian scientists to frontier research 
and technology have been encouraging. For 
example, 37 Indian scientists from nine Indian 
institutions played a key role in the discovery 
of gravitational waves that received the Physics 
Nobel prize in 2017. Indian scientists also 
contributed to the discovery of a neutron star 
merger at Laser Interferometer Gravitational 
Wave Observatory (LIGO), USA. 
• The development of Brahmos, advanced air 
defence supersonic interceptor missiles, diverse 
missiles and rocket systems, remotely piloted 
vehicles, light combat aircraft, etc., are brilliant 
examples of India’s progress in strategic and 
defence technologies. 
• India now ranks amongst a handful of nations 
that have credible capabilities in the field of 
space technology. The upgrading from SLV to 
ASLV and PSLV to GSLV , the first moon orbiter 
project Chandrayan-1, Mars Orbiter Mission 
and the recent simultaneous launch of 104 
satellites are India’s significant achievements.
• India is now the third largest country in 
terms of the number of start-ups. This 
number is expected to rise exponentially 
in the coming years. The government has 
set up the Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
to transform radically the innovation, 
entrepreneurship and start-up ecosystem of 
the country.
While India has improved in most areas of 
technology, it is also necessary to recognize the 
challenges that we need to overcome to become an 
innovation led society.
Constraints
• Low R&D expenditure, especially from the private 
sector, is a key challenge facing the innovation 
ecosystem in India. The latest R&D Statistics
2 
released by the National Science and Technology 
Management Information System (NSTMIS) of 
the Department of Science and Technology (DST) 
show that while R&D expenditure in India tripled 
in the period from 2004-05 to 2014-15, its size 
as a percentage of GDP remained at 0.7 per cent. 
This is very low compared to the 2 per cent and 
1.2 per cent spent by China (for 2015) and Brazil 
(for 2014) respectively.
3 Countries like Israel 
spend as much as 4.3 per cent of their GDP on 
R&D. Furthermore, while the share of the private 
sector in R&D investment in most technologically 
advanced countries is as high as 65 per cent to 
75 per cent, it is only about 30 per cent in India. 
• The number of scientific R&D professionals 
in India at 218 per million population is 
distressingly low compared to China’s 1,113 
and USA ’s 4,019.
• The link between research, higher education 
and industry is weak and nascent. It needs to 
be strengthened and put on a firm platform.
• Our education system has so far not focused on 
cultivating a scientific temperament at an early 
age. Even at the later stages of an aspiring sci-
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
18
entist’s career, the lack of career opportunities 
in basic sciences leads to the diversion of po-
tential researchers to other rewarding sectors.
• “Lab to Land” time is too long. Renowned public 
funded institutions like the Council of Scientific 
& Industrial Research (CSIR), Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO), Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Indian Council 
of Medical Research (ICMR), Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR) Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO), Indira Gandhi 
Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) etc., along 
with prominent universities across the country, 
have developed many frontline technologies. 
However, the rate of transfer of these 
technologies to industry and for societal benefits 
is low. 
• The adoption of indigenous innovations by 
Indian industry is not very encouraging. 
Frequent violation of Preferential Market Access 
(PMA) is an issue leading to large-scale imports 
of foreign products and services.
• The public procurement system is heavily 
biased in favour of experienced and established 
products and technologies. This strongly 
discourages new and innovative technologies 
offered by start-ups, who do not get much-
needed support from government procurement.
• There has been poor progress in the 
development and deployment of affordable 
technologies for rural areas, particularly in 
agriculture, agro-processing, micro irrigation, etc. 
The Way Forward
• An empowered body is needed to steer 
holistically the management of science in the 
country. Its scope will include science education 
and scientific research as well as coordinating 
and guiding various science initiatives. The 
proposed body will help in pursuing inter-
ministerial, inter-disciplinary research besides 
breaking silos among various scientific 
departments/agencies.
• The major weaknesses of public funded 
R&D and technology institutions like CSIR, 
DRDO, BARC, ICMR and ISRO are their poor 
marketing skills and information dissemination. 
Some measures for enhancing technology 
commercialization by public funded institutions 
are provided below:
o  Value addition centres may be set up in 
each of these institutions for (i) up-scaling 
technologies, (ii) improving technologies 
from Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 4 to 
TRL 6/7, (iii) demonstrating industrial scale 
pilot production, (iv) coordinating with in-
vestors to incubate entrepreneurs, (v) bridg-
ing the gap between industry and technolo-
gy development teams, (vi) enabling formal 
technology transfer, (vii) enabling commer-
cialization and marketing and (viii) providing 
technology support during production.
o  DST should create a National Technology 
Data Bank in coordination with all publicly 
funded R&D institutions. This will provide a 
central database for technologies that are 
ready for deployment or under development. 
o  Public funded research institutions 
should consider shifting their focus to the 
development and deployment of socially 
relevant technologies in areas such as 
clean drinking water, sanitation, energy, 
affordable healthcare, organic farming, etc. 
These technologies have large potential for 
commercialization.
• Measures related to government procurement 
include the following:
19
o  In all government procurements, 
international competitive bidding for both 
products and services should be resorted 
to only when Indian manufacturers are 
unable to supply products/services of 
comparable international quality. This will 
promote the Make in India initiative.
o  Quarterly workshops may be organised for 
creating awareness among procurement 
managers of various ministries/
departments/state governments/CPSUs, 
about the DIPP’s Public Procurement Order 
2017 (which aims to promote Make in 
India products/services). 
o  To adopt innovative technologies, 
experts/scientific practitioners should be 
mandatorily included on board/committees 
related to government procurement. All 
RFP/RFQ documents should include a 
suitable clause in this regard. 
o  In order to promote procurement of goods/
services developed by Indian start-ups, 
preference in the technical evaluation could 
be provided to them.
• To bring vibrancy to frugal innovations, a non-
lapsable “District Innovation Fund” with a corpus 
of about INR 2 crore in each district may be creat-
ed and used to promote grass root innovations. 
• AIM has already launched Atal New India 
Challenges in partnership with five ministries 
to create products from technologies and 
prototypes in areas of national importance 
such as solid waste management, water and 
wastewater management as well as road and 
rail transport. These, along with Atal Incubation 
Centres (AICs) will also provide the platform 
for promoting frugal innovation. More such 
challenges will be launched in partnership with 
ministries and support will be provided to these 
ministries to adopt the resultant innovations. 
• AIM has set up over 1000 Atal Tinkering Labs 
(ATLs) around the country covering over 625 
districts. It is aimed to take this number to 
at least 5,000 by 2019 and 10,000 by 2020. 
Further expansion will be considered based on 
the outcomes of the first phase. 
• To promote entrepreneurship and startups, AIM 
is supporting AICs across the country including 
at Tier II/III locations. These include existing 
and new incubation centres. It is expected that 
more than 100 world-class incubation centres 
will be up and running by 2020. 
• Foreign collaborators, consultants, visiting 
faculty, adjunct scientists, etc., need to be 
involved in pursuing R&D in the emerging areas 
of basic sciences such as nano-technology, 
stem cell research, astronomy, genetics, next 
generation genomics, drug discovery, etc. DST , in 
collaboration with Indian Missions abroad, may 
identify discipline wise foreign experts who can 
collaborate with Indian scientists to take basic 
research in these areas to the next level. 
• The Higher Education Commission once set 
up may consider giving credits for innovation 
and start-ups and also setting up online 
entrepreneurial development courses in colleges 
and universities.
________________________________________
1 Published by World Intellectual Property Organization jointly with Cornell University and INSEAD.
2 Source: http://www.nstmis-dst.org/Statistics-Glance-2017-18.pdf. Accessed April 20, 2018.
3 World Bank Statistics.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
20
Objectives
• Double the current growth rate of the manufac-
turing sector by 2022.
• Promote in a planned manner the adoption of 
the latest technology advancements, referred to 
as ‘Industry 4.0’, that will have a defining role 
in shaping the manufacturing sector in 2022.
Current Situation
India is the fifth largest manufacturer in the world 
with a gross value added (GVA) of INR 21,531.47 
billion in 2017-18 (2nd advance estimate for 
2017-18 at 2011-12 prices). The sector registered 
a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of around 
7.7 per cent between 2012-13 and 2017-18.1 
The government has taken several initiatives to 
promote manufacturing. Among these are the 
Make in India Action Plan aimed at increasing 
the manufacturing sector’s contribution to 25 per 
cent of GDP by 2020,
2  the Start-up India initia-
tive to promote entrepreneurship and nurture 
innovation, and the Micro Units Development 
and Refinance Agency (MUDRA) and Stand-up 
India to facilitate access to credit. It has also un-
dertaken massive recapitalisation of public sector 
banks
3  to ease availability of credit to micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Besides, 
it has undertaken major infrastructure projects, 
such as the setting up of industrial corridors, to 
boost manufacturing.
The Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
(DIPP) has been engaging with states/UTs to 
enhance the ease of doing business. Following 
concerted efforts of the government, the World 
Bank ranked India 100th among 190 countries 
in the Ease of Doing Business (EODB) in 2018. 
This was a jump of 34 positions since 2014.
While these indices are useful for comparison, 
actual improvement in EODB will come only with 
greater coordination between the centre and 
states.
The foreign direct investment (FDI) regime has been 
substantially liberalized, significantly improving 
India’s rank in terms of annual FDI inflows from 14 
in 2010 to 9 in 2017. However, India receives only 
25 per cent of the FDI that China gets and only 10 
per cent of what the USA receives. FDI inflows into 
the manufacturing sector reached about 35 per cent 
of total FDI.
4 
Manufacturing as a percentage of the gross 
domestic product has remained at about 16 per 
cent. Improvement are evident in recent quarters, 
where manufacturing growth at 6.9 per cent and 
8.1 per cent in Q2 and Q3 2017-18 (year-on-year 
as compared to 2016-17) outpaced GDP growth. 
Figure 4.1 shows the trend in manufacturing as a 
percentage of GVA from 2011-12 until 2017-18.
Constraints 
The main constraints on achieving the objectives set 
for India’s industry in 2022-23 are the following: 
4. Industry

21
improvements in our global EODB rank, it 
continues to be a drag on the system. This is 
also true of investment conditions in the states. 
Getting construction permits, enforcing con-
tracts, paying taxes, starting a business and 
trading across borders continue to constrain 
doing business.
Way Forward
Demand generation, augmentation of industrial 
infrastructure and promotion of MSMEs
• The government can play a crucial role in 
creating domestic manufacturing capabilities by 
leveraging proposed public procurement and 
projects. Mega public projects such as Sagar-
mala, Bharatmala, industrial corridors, and the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) can stimu-
late domestic manufacturing activities provided 
the projects are suitably structured and demand 
is aggregated strategically. This should be 
Figure 4.1: Manufacturing as a share of GDP , 2011-12 to 2017-18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.1% 16.1%
15.9% 16.0%
16.7%
16.8%
16.6%
15%
16%
16%
16%
16%
16%
17%
17%
17%
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
(2nd AE)
Share of GDP (%)
Source: MoSPI
• Regulatory uncertainty: Regulatory risks and 
policy uncertainty in the past have dented 
investor confidence.
• Investment: There has been a cyclical slow-
down in fresh investment since 2011-12.
• Technology adoption: The adoption of new 
technologies like artificial intelligence, data 
analytics, machine-to-machine communications, 
robotics and related technologies, collectively 
called “Industry 4.0”, are a bigger challenge 
for SMEs than for organized large-scale manu-
facturing. Data security, reliability of data and 
stability in communication/transmission also 
pose challenges to technology adoption.
• Exports and insufficient domestic demand: 
There has been no export driven industrial 
growth. Domestic demand alone may not be ad-
equate for sustained, high value manufacturing. 
• Challenges to doing business: Despite recent 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
22
accompanied by simplification of the regulatory 
process. The Madhepura Electric Locomotive 
Project, a joint venture between the Indian 
Railways and the French multinational Alstom, 
provides a good example of how mega projects 
can be leveraged to boost domestic production. 
The project enabled effective transfer of tech-
nology and the availability of state-of-the-art 
locomotives for the railways. The Madhepura 
model is replicable in the defence, aerospace, 
railways and shipping sectors. 
• Set up a portal to monitor projects beyond a 
given threshold so that any roadblocks are 
identified and addressed on a real time basis. 
State governments should be encouraged or 
incentivized to contribute data to this portal. 
NITI Aayog’s Development Monitoring and Eval-
uation Office (DMEO) can help set up the portal. 
An inter-ministerial body with representatives 
of state governments and project promoters (as 
special invitees) may be constituted. 
• Efforts should be made to develop self-sufficient 
clusters of manufacturing competence, with 
Cluster Administrative Authorities empowered 
to provide single window clearances to en-
trepreneurs and investors. Industrial corridors 
should address the lack of infrastructure and 
logistics. Logistics will need to be supplemented 
with warehousing and other elements of the 
manufacturing supply chain.
• NITI Aayog could work with states to prepare 
manufacturing clusters and develop export 
strategies based on their sector competitive-
ness and resource strengths. A cluster should 
have supporting industries and infrastructure. It 
should also develop a local brand and distribu-
tion channel through an e-commerce platform. 
A Cluster Administration Office should be given 
the responsibility to award factory permissions 
and compliances. 
• For India to become the world’s workshop, we 
should encourage further FDI in manufacturing, 
particularly when it is supported with buybacks 
and export orders.
• Streamline discretionary powers vested at 
different levels of governance by adopting 
digitized processes and making all approvals 
electronic in a transparent, time bound manner. 
• Disruptive technology, while leading to job 
losses in traditional areas, also presents new 
job opportunities. A greater connect between 
government-industry-academia is required to 
identify the changing requirements in manufac-
turing and prepare an employable workforce. In 
the context of employability of engineers, there 
is a need for thorough review of standards of 
engineering education and its linkages with 
industry. 
• E-commerce can be the driver of overall eco-
nomic growth over the next decade through 
its impact on generating demand, expanding 
manufacturing, employment generation and 
greater transparency. A Committee, chaired 
by CEO, NITI Aayog examined issues related 
to the e-commerce industry
5. It made recom-
mendations for the sector’s growth including 
increasing internet access, digitizing payments, 
further improving transportation infrastructure, 
logistics and distributed warehousing support. 
These may be examined for implementation at 
the earliest.
• Harmonize Indian quality standards with global 
standards in many sectors. Lack of harmoniza-
tion has affected Indian exports and prevented 
the leveraging of trade agreements adequately. 
23
For e.g., the medical device industry would 
benefit greatly from conformity to standards 
that are essential for new products to be 
acceptable to doctors and patients abroad. 
The issues of regulations and standards setting 
are also intertwined. The following initiative is 
required in this regard:  
o Task the Bureau of Indian Standards and  
Quality Council of India with assessing 
the improvements in standards and 
productivity required to achieve global 
standards.
• Address the following issues in respect of 
MSMEs:
o Setting up of mega parks and manufac-
turing clusters in labour intensive sectors 
with common facilities to reduce costs and 
improve quality. It is also recommended 
that state governments should set up plug 
and play parks (flatted factories) to ensure 
international productivity standards. 
o Workers of industrial units in the new 
mega parks should have decent accommo-
dation within reasonable proximity of the 
work place. 
o An expert committee should examine 
sector-specific pain points and make its 
recommendations within three months.
o The Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) should ensure registration of all 
public sector units (PSUs) on the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System (TREDS) 
portal.
o  Initiate a small business research 
programme in some select ministries for 
encouraging R&D in MSMEs.
Industry 4.0
• Launch a major initiative to push industry to 
adopt Industry 4.0. Industry 4.0 is characterized 
by increasing digitization and interconnection of 
products, value chains and business models. It 
will significantly impact sectors like automobile, 
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and financial ser-
vices and will result in operational efficiencies, 
cost control and revenue growth. Experts feel 
that emerging markets like India could benefit 
tremendously from the adoption of Industry 4.0 
practices. 
• In his 2018 Budget Speech, the Finance 
Minister mandated NITI Aayog to initiate a 
national programme directing India’s efforts 
on Artificial Intelligence
6. On a similar note, 
NITI Aayog could organize a discussion on 
“Industry 4.0,” inviting leading manufacturing 
companies from various sectors including 
automobile/auto components, electrical and 
electronics, chemicals, cement/steel, etc., 
along with concerned ministries to discuss 
plans for adopting Industry 4.0. 
• The Indian Institute of Science, a few select In-
dian Institutes of Technology (IITs), National In-
stitutes of Technology (NITs) and other premier 
engineering colleges should create specialized 
training programmes on ‘Smart Manufacturing’ 
to address the shortage of high-tech human 
resources. 
• The Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) should 
develop the Central Manufacturing Technology 
Institute (CMTI), Bangalore, as a Centre of 
Excellence for pursuing R&D in Industry 4.0 
technologies and systems. The Department 
of Science & Technology should spearhead 
industry-academia R&D projects on cyber 
physical systems.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
24
• The development of industries that produce 
the key building blocks forming the basis of 
Industry 4.0 could be incentivized. Incentives 
could be focused on MSMEs that manufacture 
products including sensors, actuators, drives, 
synchronous motors, communication systems, 
computer displays, and auxiliary electromechan-
ical systems. Similarly, industries adopting In-
dustry 4.0 standards could be provided support 
for a fixed period of time.
• Reliability, stability and integrity of smart man-
ufacturing systems can be increased by creating 
Indian standards for the systems and sub-sys-
tems for adoption by manufacturers.
Ease of doing business
• Introduce a “single window” system in all states 
that provides a single point of contact between 
investor and government and facilitates all 
required licences and approvals. It should be 
based on stakeholder consultation. 
• For efficient approval/inspection process, devel-
op a system of accountability for major stake-
holders like inspection bodies, testing labs, etc. 
• For geographical planning and ease of 
environmental clearances, adopt the system 
of using Geographic Information System (GIS) 
based maps at all levels to create pre-approved 
land banks for manufacturing facilities. This 
is already being practiced in some states. In 
such designated land banks, standards can 
be clearly laid down in advance relating to (i) 
environmental requirements (ii) building bye-
laws, and (iii) safety and other norms.
• Replicate in other states the Gujarat Pollution 
Control Board (GPCB) Environmental Audit 
Scheme based on third party certification.
• To strengthen third party certification systems, 
develop suitable accreditation agencies.
• Ensure the seamless integration of the 
Shram 
Suvidha portal and state agencies’ portals.
________________________________________
1 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation data Accessed April 30, 2018.
2 Make in India website. Accessed April 30, 2018. http://www.makeinindia.com/about.
3 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=171900. Accessed April 30, 2018.
4 http://dipp.nic.in/sites/default/files/FDI_FactSheet_21February2018.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2018.
5 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/mbErel.aspx?relid=169011. Accessed April 27, 2018.
6 http://www.indiabudget.gov.in/ub2018-19/bs/bs.pdf. Accessed April 27, 2018.
25
Objectives
• Modernize agricultural technology, increase 
productivity, efficiency and crop diversification.
• Generate income and employment through a 
paradigm shift that ensures food security while 
maximizing value addition in agriculture.
Current Situation
The existing yield levels of a majority of crops 
remains much lower than the world average. 
The predominant causes are low irrigation, use 
of low quality seeds, low adoption of improved 
technology, and knowledge deficit about 
improved agricultural practices. Close to 53 per 
cent of cropped area is water stressed. Rainwater 
management practices and services are resource 
starved. This limits a farmer’s capacity to undertake 
multiple cropping and leads to inefficient utilization 
of land resources. 
Inefficient extension delivery systems have led 
to the presence of large yield gaps as well. Yield 
gaps exist at two levels in India. First, there is a 
gap between best scientific practices and best field 
practices. The second gap exists between best 
field practices and the average farmer. There exist 
significant yield gaps both amongst and within 
states. Yield gaps have been found to exist in even 
highly productive states such as Punjab. Closing 
these gaps provides an opportunity to enhance 
productivity and incomes significantly. This further 
implies that states with low productivity (or large 
yield gaps) have significant potential for catch-up 
growth in their productivity levels.
Demand side factors favour the expansion of 
area under fruits and vegetables, and livestock 
products. These enterprises also offer better 
income. Staple crops (cereals, pulses and oilseeds) 
occupy 77 per cent of the total gross cropped 
area (GCA) but contribute only 41 per cent to 
the output of the crop sector. High value crops 
(HVCs) contribute an almost similar amount to 
total output as staples do, but they occupy only 
19 per cent of the GCA.
1  Research has also shown 
that diversification to the fruits and vegetables 
segment is likely to benefit small and medium 
farmers more than large ones. 2 
Over the past few years, new development 
initiatives aimed at modernising agriculture have 
been introduced. 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai 
Yojana (PMKSY) aims to expand irrigation coverage 
whilst promoting water use efficiency. Area under 
micro irrigation has grown 2.5 times in the last 
four years. The second cycle of the Soil Health 
Card (SHC) scheme is underway, which will focus 
on job creation and entrepreneurship development 
through local entrepreneurship models. So far, 
3.76 crore SHCs have been distributed under the 
second cycle.
5. Doubling Farmers’ Income (I):  
Modernizing Agriculture
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
26
Constraints
1. Use of outdated and inappropriate technology 
is the main reason for low productivity of crops 
and livestock. 
2. Given the pre-dominance of small and margin-
al farmers in Indian agriculture, affordability 
becomes a significant constraint on technology 
adoption by farmers.
3. There exist several bottlenecks hampering 
on-farm adoption of technology developed in 
public sector.  
4. Agricultural research in the country is constrained 
by resource inadequacy, regulations and intellec-
tual property rights (IPR). 
5. Multiple private and public sources supplying 
different information to farmers create 
confusion.
6. A huge gap exists between the demand for and 
supply of skills in agriculture, hindering diver-
sification, adoption of precision agriculture and 
on farm post-harvest value addition.
7. India has not caught up to the rest of the 
world in terms of technology, which has led 
to the dominance of inefficient production 
practices, such as flood irrigation, at the farm 
level. Renewed focus on on-ground absorption 
of technology, market intelligence, skills and 
extension and modernising trade and com-
merce in agriculture are needed to modernise 
agriculture in India. 
8. Both production and marketing suffer due to 
the absence of adequate capital. 
9. Low scale is a serious constraint on the adop-
tion of improved practices and in the input and 
output market. 
Way Forward
Productivity and efficiency 
Increase area under irrigation : Irrigation coverage 
needs to be increased to 53 per cent of gross 
cropped area (GCA) by 2022-23. 3 The focus 
should be on increasing coverage through micro-
irrigation.
Increase adoption of hybrid and improved seeds: 
States should take the lead through the following 
measures:
• Dynamic seed development plans are required. 
These may be based on crop wise area (each 
season separately), seed rate per hectare used, 
desired/targeted seed replacement rate and 
crop wise seed requirement. Crop wise require-
ment should be worked out based on histor-
ical trends, introduction of new varieties and 
replacement of poor yielding varieties. 
• States should aim to increase the seed replace-
ment rate (SRR) to 33 per cent for self-pollinated 
crops and 50 per cent for cross-pollinated crops 
in alternative years. 
Increase Variety Replacement Ratio (VRR): Phase out 
old varieties of seeds and replace them with hybrid 
and improved seeds to enhance productivity. The 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) along 
with State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) should 
develop climate resilient varieties of crops suitable 
for the 128 agro-climatic zones of the country, 
through farmer participatory plant breeding and 
adopting farm varietal trials from the third year of 
the development of the seed. 
Strengthen seed testing facilities: Seed testing 
facilities need upgradation in terms of both 
personnel and technical expertise. Regular 
performance monitoring is required to maintain the 
quality of test results. 
27
Uniform national procedure for seed licensing: 
To tackle the problem of heterogeneity in seed 
licensing procedures across states, the central 
government should develop model guidelines for 
seed licensing and support states in implementing 
these. 
Efficient fertilizer usage: Strengthen the SHC 
scheme and include not merely nine but all sixteen 
parameters in the tests. This will ensure SHC based 
fertilizer distribution at the ground level. Seed SHCs 
with the integrated fertilizer management system. 
Link SHCs with Kisan credit cards and make SHCs 
mandatory for subsidies.  Ensure proper functioning 
of the SHC labs. 
Reorient fertilizer subsidy policy: The current 
lopsided fertilizer subsidy policy needs to bring 
secondary and micronutrients on the same nutrient-
based subsidy (NBS) platform as phosphorus (P) and 
potash (K). 
Regulate pesticide use: Align the pesticide 
regulatory framework with food safety laws to 
make adoption broad based. Strengthen extension 
activities to ensure that best practices reach the 
average farmer. 
Custom hiring centres: Madhya Pradesh has 
had demonstrable success with their custom 
hiring centre model to hasten the pace of farm 
mechanization. This model should be replicated 
nationwide by employing rural youth and 
promoting entrepreneurship. 
Subsidies on liquid fertilizers: Targeted subsidy 
should be provided on liquid fertilizers to encourage 
fertigation with micro-irrigation. 
Investment subsidies for micro-irrigation: Rather 
than power and water subsidies, investment 
subsidies for micro-irrigation can be provided 
through the DBT mode. 
Strengthening extension systems
Synergy between Agriculture Technology 
Management Agency (ATMA) and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs): The ATMA programme needs to 
be reoriented to include bottom up planning at 
the district and block levels to develop Strategic 
Research Extension Plans (SREP).4  Further 
decentralization and autonomy are essential to 
the success of this programme. Subject matter 
specialists at KVKs should orient their research to 
the block action plans developed by ATMA. 
Public Private Partnership in KVKs: The guiding 
principles of ATMA provide for the promotion of PPP 
in extension delivery. With each KVK in possession 
of approximately 50 acres of land, KVKs should 
incubate private sector initiatives in extension 
delivery. 
Market led extension: Give priority to extension 
services that disseminate information to farmers 
regarding (i) crop selection (ii) demand for and 
supply of crop produce, (iii) expected price of 
commodity and (iv) availability of infrastructure 
facilities for storage, transport and marketing of 
produce. 
Value added extension: Prioritise value added 
extension services to enable a reduction in post-
harvest losses by converting raw agricultural 
produce to processed products. This allows for 
increased price realization and contributes towards 
increasing farmers’ income. 
District level skill mapping: ICAR and SAUs should 
map the demand for and supply of skills in 
agriculture at the district level and coordinate with 
skill development missions to impart the required 
skills to farmers and agricultural labour. 
Replicate dealer training programme in state 
agricultural universities: The National Institute of 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
28
Agricultural Extension Management’s (MANAGE) 
dealer training programme should be replicated 
in SAUs, with diploma holders granted licences to 
conduct extension activities. 
Sustainable water use in agriculture : About 83 
per cent of water is used in agriculture. The 
solution to resolving India’s imminent water crisis 
lies in conserving water in agriculture. Therefore, 
more efficient irrigation technologies, water 
harvesting and better crop selection must be 
encouraged.
Diversification: promotion of high value 
crops (HVCs) and livestock
High value crops
Encourage diversification to HVCs: Design an 
incentive mechanism to wean farmers away from 
cereal crops to HVCs. The area under fruits and 
vegetables needs to increase by 5 per cent every 
year.5
Establish regional production belts: As in the cluster-
based approach, regional production belts for HVCs 
need to be identified and supported through the 
Mission on Integrated Development of Horticulture 
(MIDH). Make SHCs mandatory in these belts. 
Use of hybrid technology in vegetables: Shift to 
using hybrid varieties for vegetables. At present, 
10 per cent of the cropped area under vegetables is 
under hybrids. Shifting to hybrids has the potential 
to increase yields by 1.5 to 3 times and provide a 
significant increase in income.
6 
Rootstocks for production of fruits: Rootstock 
technology has shown the capacity to double 
production and be resilient to climate stress. 
Measures should be taken to standardize and 
promote usage of rootstocks to produce fruits. 
Smart horticulture: There have been pockets of 
success spread throughout the country, using 
techniques such as high-density plantation, 
protected cultivation and organic production. These 
methods need to be documented and replicated at 
the national level. It is recommended that a mission 
on smart horticulture may be setup to identify 
and promote new technologies. This mission must 
work in synergy with various agricultural research 
institutions in the country. 
Strengthen market for organic products: Targeted 
efforts to create a market for niche products is 
recommended. Spices unique to a state can be 
branded by the Spice Board to encourage the 
production of organic spices.
Convert agricultural waste: Recycling and utilizing 
agricultural waste would give a further filip to 
farmers’ income.
Livestock and fisheries
Breed indigenous cattle with exotic breeds: 
Breeding of indigenous cattle with exotic breeds 
needs to be encouraged to arrest the issue of 
inbreeding. This will enable greater gene coverage, 
reduced diseases and greater resilience to climate 
change.
7 
Promote and develop bull mother farms: 
Employing multiple ovulation and embryo transfer 
technologies, these farms can significantly enhance 
milk productivity through the supply of cattle with 
enhanced milk potential to farmers. 
Village level procurement systems: Installing of bulk 
milk chillers and facilities for high value conversion 
of milk are needed to promote dairy in states. The 
private sector should be incentivized to create a 
value chain for HVCs and dairy products at the 
village level.
29
________________________________________
1 Chand, Ramesh (2017), Doubling Farmers’ Income: Rationale, Strategy, Prospects & Action Plan, NITI Aayog Policy Paper, NITI Aayog. 
New Delhi.
2 Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (2018). Vol. II: Status of Farmers’ Income: 
Strategies for Accelerated Growth, Doubling Farmers’ Income. New Delhi.
3 Chand, Ramesh (2017), Doubling Farmers’ Income: Rationale, Strategy, Prospects & Action Plan, NITI Aayog Policy Paper, NITI Aayog. 
New Delhi.
4 Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (2017). Vol. XI: Empowering the Farmers 
through Extension. New Delhi.
5 Chand, Ramesh (2017), Doubling Farmers’ Income: Rationale, Strategy, Prospects & Action Plan, NITI Aayog Policy Paper, NITI Aayog. 
New Delhi.
6 Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (2018). Vol. VIII-C. Horticulture and 
Sericulture: Production Enhancement through Productivity Gains. New Delhi.
7 Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (2018). National Conference on Agriculture. Background Paper on Promotion of 
Livestock, Dairy, Poultry and Fisheries as Engines of Growth. New Delhi.
Convergence of schemes in fisheries sector: 
Integrate the Blue Revolution scheme with 
MGNREGA. Ponds created through MGNREGA 
should be used to promote aquaculture and can be 
used to create potential clusters as well. 
Capacity building for fish breeders and farmers: 
Establish fish co-operative organisations and run vil-
lage level schemes in coordination with panchayats 
to disseminate best practices and research. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
30
Objectives
• Create a policy environment that enables 
income security for farmers, whilst maintaining 
India’s food security. 
• Encourage the participation of the private sector 
in agricultural development to transition from 
agriculture to robust agri-business systems. 
• Promote through government policies the 
emergence of ‘agripreneurs’ so that even small 
and marginal farmers can capture a higher 
share of value addition from ‘farmgate to fork’. 
Current Situation
The mismatch between the contribution of 
agriculture to national income and share in 
employment has remained large and has 
widened. The manufacturing and service sectors 
have failed to absorb the excessive workforce 
in agriculture. Consequently, value addition per 
worker in agriculture grew slowly and income 
per farmer never crossed one-third of the income 
of a non-agriculture worker since the 1980s. The 
country took 22 years to double farmers’ income 
at an annual growth rate of 3.31 per cent during 
1993-1994 to 2015-16; doubling farmers’ income 
between 2015-16 and 2022-23 will require an 
annual growth rate of 10.4 per cent in farmers’ 
real income. 
Corporate investment in agricultural infrastructure 
has not exceeded 2 per cent. In the years post-
independence, the policy structure was focused on 
increased production and productivity to ensure 
food security for India. However, to achieve the 
target of doubling farmers’ income by 2022-23, we 
need to shift our focus from agriculture to agri-
business.
The current government has taken several steps to 
improve private investment in agriculture. 100 per 
cent foreign direct investment (FDI) was allowed 
in 2016-17. Similarly, the SAMPADA scheme 
targets creation of food processing infrastructure. 
The budget allocation to the food processing 
sector was doubled in the Union Budget 2018-19. 
Introduction of the Model Agricultural Produce and 
Livestock Marketing Act (2017), Model Contract 
Farming Act, new guidelines for agro-forestry are 
some other key policy initiatives taken over the 
past few years.
Constraints
1. Fragmented land holdings
 Agriculture is characterised by an extremely 
fragmented landholding structure with an 
average farm size of 1.15 hectares and the 
predominance of small and marginal farmers, 
with those holding less than 2 hectares 
6. Doubling Farmers’ Income (II):  
Policy & Governance
31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46% 
63% 
48% 
37% 
58% 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Arahar (Tur) Gram (Whole) Maize Rice (Coarse) Wheat (Desi)
Gap (%) 
Figure 6.1: Price spread between farm harvest prices and retail prices for select 
agricultural commodities, 2015-16
Source: NITI Aayog Calculations & Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
(accounting for 85 per cent of agricultural 
households).1  This makes it difficult for them 
to access credit or new technology, severely 
affecting farm productivity and hence, farmers’ 
incomes. 
2. Low price realization
 There exists a large gap between farm harvest 
prices (FHP) and retail prices (see Figure 6.1).2  
Prices also tend to fall below the minimum 
support prices in a good production year, 
leading to agrarian distress. Mechanisms need 
to be developed to ensure remunerative prices 
to farmers, in both ‘good’ and ‘bad’ monsoon 
years. 
3. Non-farm employment
 Lack of non-farm employment opportunities has 
resulted in excessive dependence on agriculture 
for livelihood among both small and marginal 
farmers as well as among the landless. 
4. Agricultural credit
 Despite an allocation of more than INR 11 
lakh crore of commercial credit, access to 
institutional credit remains a constraint, 
especially in the case of tenant farmers. 
5. Agricultural trade
 Exporters of agro-commodities are not 
successful in raising their share in global 
markets because of uncertainty in the foreign 
trading regime.
Way Forward
• Marketing reforms
 Many of the constraints in marketing can be 
addressed by adopting the Model Agricultural 
Produce and Livestock Marketing Act (APLM), 
2017,3  which provides for progressive agricul-
tural marketing reforms, including the setting 
up of markets in the private sector, allowing 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
32
direct sales to exporters/processors and cus-
tomers, farmer-consumer markets, e-trading, 
single point levy of market fee, a unified single 
trading licence in a state, declaring warehouses/
silos/cold storage as market sub-yards and the 
launch of the National Market for Agriculture. 
APLM should be adopted by all states as expe-
ditiously as possible. 
• Amend Essential Commodities Act
 The Essential Commodities Act, which has 
proven a disincentive to large investment in 
agricultural technology and infrastructure, 
should be replaced with a modern statute 
that balances the interests of farmers and 
consumers. 
• Stable export policy
 In consultation with all stakeholders, the 
Government of India should come up with 
a coherent and stable agricultural export 
policy, ideally with a five to ten-year time 
horizon and a built-in provision for a mid-term 
review. Efforts should be made to achieve this 
urgently. 
• Price realization
 The government should consider replacing 
the Commission on Agricultural Costs & Prices 
(CACP) by an agriculture tribunal in line with the 
provisions of Article 323 B of the Constitution. 
NITI Aayog should set up a group to examine 
the following:
o Replacing the minimum support price 
(MSP) by a minimum reserve price (MRP), 
which could be the starting point for 
auctions at mandis.
o Separating the criteria for MSPs for (i) 
surplus produce; (ii) for deficit but globally 
available products; and (iii) for products 
that are in deficit both domestically and 
globally.
o Examine options for including private 
traders operating in markets to 
complement the minimum support price 
regime through a system of incentives and 
commission payments. 
 Raising MSP or prices can only be a 
partial solution to the problem of assuring 
remunerative returns to farmers. A long-term 
solution lies in the creation of a competitive, 
stable and unified national market to enable 
better price discovery, and a long-term trade 
regime favourable to exports. 
 
Agriculture advisory service: An effective and 
technology driven Agriculture Advisory Service 
may be considered on the lines of those of the 
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
and the European Union (EU). The mandate 
would be to ensure that farmers adopt an 
optimal cropping pattern that maximizes their 
income. 
 
Futures trade: Futures trade should be 
encouraged. Removal of entry barriers to 
increase market depth should be considered.  
 Crop insurance: PMFBY needs to be modified to -
o Promote weather-based insurance.
o Increase non-loanee farmers’ insurance 
coverage. 
o Allow for mixed cropping and increase the 
number of crops notified.
• Contract farming
 Encourage states to adopt the Model Contract 
Farming Act, 2018: Contract farming can be 
thought of as a form of price futures. The 
33
contract will specify the price and quality at 
which the farmers’ produce will be purchased. 
This protects the farmer in cases where prices 
fall below the MSP . 
Box 1: Salient features of the Model Contract 
Farming Act, 2018
The Draft Model Contract Farming Act, 2018, is 
an attempt to provide an enabling environment 
for contract farming to thrive. First, the Act takes 
contract farming out of the ambit of Agricultural 
Produce Marketing Committees (APMCs). 
Under the Model Act, every agreement 
shall be registered with a Registering and 
Agreement Recording Committee, consisting of 
officials from departments such as agriculture, 
horticulture, animal husbandry, marketing, 
fisheries and rural development. The committee 
can be set up at the district, block or 
taluk 
levels. The Act also contains a provision for 
the creation of a State-level Contract Farming 
(Promotion and Facilitation) Authority. 
Dispute resolution is essential to the smooth 
functioning of the Model Act. Both farmers 
and buyers need to be protected from risks 
pertaining to executing the contract. For 
example, buyers are exposed to the risk 
of the farmer selling his produce to a third 
party, whilst the farmer is exposed to the risk 
of receiving a price below the agreed price. 
The Model Act contains several provisions 
for dispute resolution. Briefly, these are (i) 
negotiation and reconciliation for a mutually 
acceptable solution, (ii) referral of the matter to 
a nominated dispute settlement officer and (iii) 
appealing to the Contract Farming (Promotion 
and Facilitation) Authority if no suitable solution 
is found through solutions (i) and (ii). 
• Land aggregation
o 
Encourage states to adopt the Model Agri-
culture Land Leasing Act, 2016:  The Model 
Act aims to improve land access to small 
and marginal farmers through land leasing, 
whilst also providing for a mechanism for 
tenants to avail of institutional credit. A 
major constraint to land leasing under the 
present regulatory environment is the un-
willingness of landowners to lease out land 
due to fears of land capture by tenants. 
The Model Act spells out the rights and 
responsibilities of both landowners and 
tenants. Like the Model Contract Farming 
Act, 2018, this Act too contains provisions 
for dispute resolution within a specified 
timeframe.
o 
Digitize land records : Complete digitiza-
tion of land records is a must for effective 
implementation of land leasing. Geo-tag-
ging, along with location agnostic online 
registration of land records to generate 
updated land records, must be carried 
out.
4
o Promote farmer producer organizations 
(FPOs): There are now 741 FPOs in the 
country, managed under the aegis of 
Small Farmers Agribusiness Consortium 
(SFAC). They have demonstrated that 
aggregating farmers can help achieve 
economies of scale. The benefits accord-
ed to start-ups under the Start-up India 
Mission need to be extended to FPOs as 
well. National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development (NABARD’s) model of 
joint liability groups can be promoted to 
channelize small growers into the value 
chain.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
34
• Research & development
o Focus on precision agriculture : Support 
research on energy friendly irrigation 
pumps, micro irrigation, climate smart 
technologies, internet of things (IoT), and 
use of technology in animal husbandry 
to monitor animal behaviour, health 
and production to prepare for future 
challenges. 
o Raise research spending: Research 
spending, currently at 0.3 per cent, needs 
to be increased to at least 1 per cent of 
agricultural GDP . 
o Create a knowledge hub to disseminate 
best practices : It is essential that new 
technology be adopted at the farm 
level. The performance of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) should be regularly 
reviewed by external agencies and well 
performing KVKs must be strengthened 
to disseminate best practices at the field 
level. 
o 
Develop models of integrated farming : 
Research so far has focused on practices 
for individual crops or enterprises. The 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) and State Agriculture Universities 
(SAUs) should focus on providing 
recommendations across the farming 
value chain, covering production, post-
production, processing and other value-
addition activities. 
• Innovation
     Several breakthroughs have the clear potential 
for quickly doubling farmers’ income. 
o One is the recorded success of zero budget 
natural farming by Subhash Palekar. It is 
now being adopted across the country and 
providing notable increases in farmers’ 
net income by sharply reducing costs of 
production and improving incomes by 
raising yields and improving the quality of 
agricultural produce. 
o Two, there are patented herbal inputs 
that improve soil quality and make plants 
more pest resistant. These herbal inputs, 
for which actual performance data is now 
available for a few thousand farmers, need 
to be applied across the country. 
o Three, rapid progress has also been made 
in organic farming techniques, which have 
also helped improve incomes of cultivators 
and dairy farmers. These should be 
carefully examined for possible application 
across the country. 
• Non-farm income
o Moving labour out of agriculture into 
manufacturing will go a long way towards 
the goal of doubling farmers’ income. 
According to estimates prepared by Chand, 
Srivastava & Singh (2017), nearly two-
thirds of rural income is generated in non-
agricultural activities. In non-agricultural 
activities in rural areas, another avenue is 
shifting farmers to agro-business and farm-
related skills which are currently in short 
supply. Create and nurture agripreneurs for 
achieving greater value addition through 
agro-processing and propagation of 
modern extension services.  
o India will also have to accelerate growth 
in the manufacturing, services and 
exports sectors to wean labour away 
from agriculture. This will result in higher 
productivity and income for farmers. 
35
________________________________________
1 Agriculture Census 2010-11.
2 Latest data on FHP is available only for 2015-16. Where state weighted average was not available or FHP was not available, the 
FHP for 2014-15 was increased by an amount equal to the MSP increase between 2014-15 and 2015-16. The annual retail price has 
been derived by taking a simple average of monthly prices across states.
3 Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (2017). Volume XIII: Structural Reforms and 
Governance Framework. New Delhi.
4 Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (2017). Volume XIII: Structural Reforms and 
Governance Framework. New Delhi.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
36
Objectives
• Transform the rural economy through the 
creation of modern rural infrastructure and an 
integrated value chain system.
• Leverage the value chain to boost India’s 
exports of food products.
• Create occupational diversification and quality 
employment opportunities for doubling farmers’ 
income by 2022-23.
Current Situation
Despite rapid progress, rural India suffers from 
an infrastructure deficit. The present government 
has done an admirable job in achieving full 
village electrification and accelerating the pace of 
7. Doubling Farmers’ Income (III): 
Value Chain & Rural Infrastructure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.1: Additional markets required by 2022-23
Source: Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare
37
Source: National Centre for Cold Chain Development (2015)
connecting habitations through the Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). Similarly, household 
electrification has been given a significant push 
under the SAUBHAGYA scheme. Agriculture 
infrastructure, such as rural markets, warehouses, 
cold chain, farm machinery hubs and public 
irrigation need upgradation.  
Based on the recommendations of the Dalwai 
Committee on Doubling Farmers’ Income, the 
number of additional markets required comes to 
3,548. The recent 2018-19 budget announcement 
to develop the existing 22,000 Rural Periodic 
Markets (RPMs) into 
Grameen Agriculture Markets 
(GrAMs) will offer better market access to small and 
marginal farmers. This initiative recognises GrAMs 
as facilities for first stage post production activities, 
enabling aggregation and transport from the 
village level to wholesale markets. The electronic 
national agriculture market (e-NAM) was launched 
in 2016 to create a unified national market. So far, 
479 
mandis across 14 states and UTs have been 
integrated on the platform. 
The lack of an adequate and efficient cold chain 
infrastructure leads to massive post-harvest losses, 
estimated at INR 92,561crore annually.1  Perishables 
account for the bulk of post-harvest losses. Moreover, 
as a recent report indicates,2  most existing cold 
storages are single commodity storages, resulting 
in their capacities lying idle for up to six months a 
year. The cold-chain infrastructure is also unevenly 
distributed among states. 
Inadequate cold-chain infrastructure hampers 
India’s food exports as well. Countries across 
the world have stringent guidelines for import 
of agricultural and processed food products. 
The European Union (EU) has raised more 
notifications, issued more rejections and destroyed 
more consignments from India as compared to 
consignments from other developing countries 
such as Turkey, Brazil, China and Vietnam.
3  India 
has huge export potential, reflected in the fact that 
its domestic commodity prices were below export 
parity prices in 72 per cent of cases.4 
The present government has taken several steps 
to modernise the agri value chain. The SAMPADA 
central sector scheme aims to supplement 
agriculture by modernising processing activities 
and decreasing agri-waste. Similarly, in the 2018-
19 budget, ‘Operation Green’ on the lines of 
‘Operation Flood’ was announced. This scheme 
aims to promote farmer producer organisations, 
agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional 
management of such operations.
Table 7.1: Gaps in cold-chain development
Type All-India Requirement 2015 Status on 31.12.2017
Pack-houses 69,831 20,864
Cold Storage (million) 34.16 MT 35.88 MT
Reefer Vehicles 52,826 1,047
Ripening Chambers 8,319 443
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
38
Constraints
1. Public and private investments in agriculture 
have remained low since the early 90s. 
Bottlenecks in implementation and a high 
degree of uncertainty have further reduced 
investor appetite for agricultural investments.
2. Inability to acquire land for setting up of market 
yards, resulting from the restrictions on land 
leasing and land acquisition, is another major 
constraint.
3. Even the existing marketing infrastructure 
suffers because of a lack of finances, 
manpower and proper facilities. Sub-market 
yards largely function as a location for 
government procurement and do not provide 
opportunities for open auction. Further, they 
are irregular in their operations and handle 
less than five per cent of the volume handled 
in principal yards. 
4. Poor maintenance of rural roads is a major 
constraint as well. Linkages with local and 
feeder roads remain sub-optimal.
5. In the electricity sector, separate feeders for 
supply of power to agriculture and domestic 
electrification have not been carried out in many 
states. 
6. Lack of agriculture best practices hinders 
India’s food exports. Interventions at the farm 
or producer level are needed to ensure that 
products meet export standards. However, 
factors such as the lack of a traceability 
mechanism from the farm to the consumer, 
fragmented holdings and restrictions on 
direct procurement of products from farmers 
in some states makes it virtually impossible 
to ensure that products meet export quality 
standards.
Way Forward
Markets and value chain
Infrastructure status for agriculture value chains: 
Warehousing, pack-houses, ripening chambers, and 
cold storages, including those set up at the village 
level, should be accorded full-fledged infrastructure 
status to enable them to avail of the fiscal benefits 
that come with infrastructure status. 
Village level procurement centres: To benefit small 
and marginal farmers, government collection 
centres and warehousing facilities should be 
set up at the village/block level. The budget 
announcement of developing Gramin Agricultural 
Markets (GrAMs) will help develop the agricultural 
marketing infrastructure and bring markets closer to 
the farm-gate. 
Link production to processing: Village level 
collection centres for fruits and vegetables should 
be linked to larger processing units. Actively engage 
the private sector in developing processing centres 
near rural periodic markets (RPMs).
Food processing : A greater focus should be 
placed on the food processing industry for 
enhancing value addition in vegetable and 
fruit crops. The government has now shifted its 
attention to promoting “agripreneurs”. This will 
result in rapid modernization of the agriculture 
sector.
Rural markets: Develop private market yards. 
Agro-processors and food processors that wish to 
establish backward integration to secure their raw 
material should partner with the government in 
organizing sourcing through the RPMs.
Upgrade wolesale markets: Upgrade wholesale 
markets with facilities for temporary storage, pack-
house operations and cold storage facilities.
39
Warehouse upgradation : Pledge financing at 
warehouses, through negotiable warehouse 
receipts (NWR), needs to be adopted and 
popularized as an alternative means of financing. 
The Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ 
Welfare (DACFW) should draw up guidelines to 
promote warehouse based post-harvest loans and 
e-NWR trading. 
Block level resource centres: Establish functional 
block level resource centres to create value chains, 
targeting clusters of villages along with social 
services. It will create an integrated solution for the 
farmer to access his/her requirements for agriculture 
and other services. It will also add to employment 
generation at the local level by engaging youth and 
creating village level entrepreneurs.
Convergence in government initiatives: Coordination 
is needed between the initiatives of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Food Processing, and Commerce to 
develop effective procurement linkages, processing 
facilities, retail chains and export activity. This will 
facilitate synergies between various initiatives 
such as the 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
of the agriculture ministry, viability gap funding 
of the Ministry of Commerce for cold chains and 
warehousing infrastructure development and 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana of MOFPI.
Strengthen railway freight operations: Railway 
freight operations should be strengthened through 
temperature-controlled containers and loading and 
unloading facilities to reduce post-harvest losses 
and connect land-locked states to export markets. 
Rural roads, electricity and mechanization
Maintenance of rural roads through women 
SHGs: The maintenance of roads by women SHGs 
has been experimented with by some states 
(Uttarakhand for example) and has been found to 
be very promising. This model could be replicated 
by other states. 
Revisit criteria for identification of rural habitats for 
road connectivity: To ensure better inclusion, the 
criteria for identification of habitats for rural roads 
connectivity in hill and left-wing extremism (LWE) 
affected districts must be revisited.
Incentivize feeder separation: All distribution 
companies (DISCOMs) need to be incentivized for 
rural feeder separation. Agriculture connections and 
electricity supply feeders should be separated from 
domestic rural electricity supply. 
Incentivize private investment in farm implements: 
Private entrepreneurs should be incentivized to 
establish small farm implement mechanization hubs 
for every 1000 ha and big machinery hubs for every 
5000 ha of cultivated area. 
Export enablers
Develop export oriented clusters: The Agricultural 
and Processed Food Export Development Authority 
(APEDA) has been championing the development of 
export-oriented clusters with common infrastructure 
facilities. These clusters should contain a functional, 
end-to-end cold chain system along with processing 
facilities.
Increase the number of testing laboratories: 
There exists a shortage of testing laboratories, 
essential for health certificates for exports. Private 
laboratories should be extended financial support to 
achieve international accreditation. As suggested by 
APEDA, agricultural universities should also seek to 
get their labs accredited by APEDA. 
Augment cargo handling facilities at airports: 
APEDA has suggested augmenting the capacity of 
the Ahmedabad Air Cargo Complex and Mumbai 
Airport to handle agricultural cargo. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
40
Green channel clearance: Efforts must be made to 
setup a green channel for perishable produce at 
identified airports handling cargo. 
Regulatory frameworks to combat rejections in 
export markets: Regulatory frameworks regarding 
use of pesticides, growth hormones, and antibiotics 
for marine produce need to be developed and 
implemented effectively to curb the rejection rate in 
the export market.
Ensure traceability mechanism: Promotion of farmer 
producer organizations (FPOs), export-based clusters 
and contract farming will go a long way towards 
ensuring traceability of farm produce, a key export 
requirement. 
________________________________________
1 ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and Technology (CIPHET).
2 Grant Thorton and ASSOCHAM (2017), Food Processing Sector: Challenges and Growth Enablers <http://www.grantthornton.in/
globalassets/1.-member-firms/india/assets/pdfs/food_processing_sector.pdf>. Accessed April 12, 2018.
3 Goyal, Mukherjee and Kapoor (2017). India’s Exports of Food Products: Food Safety Issues and Way Forward. ICRIER: New Delhi.
4 Gulati and Saini (2017). Price Distortions in Indian Agriculture. ICRIER: New Delhi.
41
Objectives
• Banking for the unbanked
o  Bank accounts: Ensuring universal access to 
bank accounts, which are a gateway to all 
financial services.
o  Digital payment services: Providing access to 
digital payment services and increasing its 
penetration.
• Securing the unsecured
o  Insurance and social security: Ensuring 
universal coverage of insurance for life, 
accidents, etc., and of pensions and other 
retirement planning services. 
o  Asset diversification: Allowing diversification 
of asset portfolio of households through 
increased participation in capital markets.
• Better access to credit at a reasonable cost 
for those presently excluded 
Current Situation
The government has launched many flagship 
schemes to promote financial inclusion and 
provide financial security to empower the poor and 
unbanked in the country. These include the 
Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Mudra 
Yojana, Stand-Up India Scheme, Pradhan Mantri 
Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Suraksha 
Bima Yojana, and Atal Pension Yojana. In addition, 
the promotion of Aadhaar and direct benefit transfer 
schemes facilitate financial inclusion. 
These schemes have led to significant progress. 
According to World Bank data, in 2014, 53 per 
cent of adults had a bank account. This increased 
to 80 per cent in 2017, which is now comparable 
to China.1 Many recent independent studies have 
documented the increased ownership and active 
use of bank accounts because of the 
Jan Dhan 
scheme.2  There has also been an increase in 
the penetration of low cost insurance schemes 
and pension schemes. Even as the importance of 
financial assets is increasing for Indian households, 
physical assets continue to be the predominant 
asset class for savings for them.
Awareness and use of mobile payments in India 
had been low. In 2016, the percentage of the 
population using mobile money services in India 
was only 1 per cent, compared to Bangladesh 
(40 per cent), Pakistan (9 per cent), Kenya (81 per 
cent) and Tanzania (61 per cent).
3  Many of these 
models in other countries have been driven by 
non-banking providers such as telecommunication 
companies, using modes of communication such 
as Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
(USSD). However, after demonetization and the 
launch of the BHIM platform, penetration of 
mobile payments has improved. Several new 
initiatives such as 
Aadhaar-enabled payment 
services, payment banks, etc. will boost the use of 
mobile payments.
In terms of credit access, India has considerable 
ground to make up. In 2016, the number of loan 
accounts per 1,000 adults was 154 in India. In 
comparison, the number of loan accounts per 
8. Financial Inclusion

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
42
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
Share of household savings (%)  
Year 
Financial
Physical
Gold & Silver
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Aug-16
Sep-16
Oct-16
Nov-16
Dec-16
Jan-17
Feb-17
Mar-17
Apr-17
May-17
Jun-17
Jul-17
Aug-17
Sep-17
Oct-17
Nov-17
Dec-17
Jan-18
Feb-18
Mar-18
Apr-18
May-18
Number of transactions (Million)
Transaction amount INR. Crores)
Figure 8.1: Distribution of household savings across physical and financial assets
Figure 8.2: Growth in unified payment interface (UPI) usage
Source: First Revised Estimates of National Income, Consumption Expenditure, Saving and Capital Formation for 2016-17, 
Central Statistics Office, January 2018
Source: UPI Product Statistics: National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI)
43
1,000 adults was 88 in Bangladesh, 26 in Pakistan, 
417 in South Africa, and 231 in Kenya. Similarly, 
bank credit to GDP ratio in India is 51 per cent, as 
compared to 98 per cent in China in 2016.4 
Constraints
1. Lack of financial literacy amongst low income 
households and small informal businesses.
2. The high cost of operations of the traditional 
banking model.
3. Excessive regulatory requirements on products, 
and market entry, and conservative regulatory 
approach to new technologies.
Way Forward
1.  Launching a new scheme for comprehensive 
financial literacy
• An 
Arthik Shiksha Abhiyan will help improve 
financial literacy and may be integrated in the 
regular school curriculum. Besides, efforts to 
improve financial literacy should be complemented 
by mass media campaigns to provide information 
on financial products and their use. 
2.  Assess the performance of banking 
correspondents and give better incentives
• Given the infeasibility of locating branches in 
every nook and corner of the country, bank 
correspondents are used to reach out to 
prospective clients. However, an inadequate 
compensation structure makes correspondent 
banking unattractive. The issue of inadequate 
training is being addressed by the RBI which 
has developed a framework for certification for 
both basic and advanced levels. There is also 
a need to create better monetary incentives for 
banking correspondents as well as to provide 
them better training.
3.  Facilitating growth of online and paperless 
banking
• Paperless banking will reduce friction, 
documentation proof requirements and the cost 
of banking services. This, in turn, will bring 
a larger proportion of the population within 
the ambit of the formal financial system. The 
following actions are required on the policy 
front:
o Ease transaction limits for e-KYC based 
deposit and loan accounts. 
o Push digital signature for loan accounts 
by asking public sector banks to carry out 
at least 25% of their transactions through 
paperless accounts by 2022-23.
o Expand digilocker services by including 
more issuers of documents. 
4.  Using technology to improve the assessment 
of credit-worthiness for households and 
informal businesses
• One of the main constraints in providing low-in-
come households and informal businesses is the 
lack of information available with formal creditors 
to determine their credit worthiness. This results in 
high cost of credit. This constraint can be over-
come by the adoption of appropriate technology. 
• Create a new data-sharing framework that 
builds on the success of 
Jan Dhan and Aadhaar 
platforms to enable easier access to credit, 
with adequate safeguards for maintaining data 
privacy. 
• Existing gaps in land records such as transfers 
of ancestral properties, conversion to free 
hold, regularization of colonies, extension of 
limited tenure pattas, etc., need to be filled. In 
addition, a central land holding register could 
be prepared and maintained in a digital format.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
44
 In addition to greater digitization, there is also a 
need to strengthen cyber security in the country. 
A common cyber security framework across 
different stakeholders should be created.
5.  Leverage payment banks and other 
platforms to scale up payments systems in 
underserved areas
• Post offices are familiar sights in all villages. 
Payment banks, including the India Post 
Payment Bank, can potentially revolutionize the 
payments system like telecom companies did 
in Africa and other South Asian countries, with 
innovative products like mobile money. 
• A flexible and proactive approach towards 
regulations on payment banks, such as 
regulations on minimum capital requirements, 
transaction amounts, and restriction on 
investments, should be adopted to ensure that 
the payment bank model becomes commercially 
viable and scalable. 
• Payments through the USSD channel have an 
advantage over the internet in that it can also 
cover a large proportion of non-smartphone 
users. This has been the experience from the 
successful scale up of payments systems in 
many African countries. In India, USSD can be 
particularly useful in rural areas where some 
segments still do not have reliable access to 
the internet. Thus, the USSD channel should be 
promoted for government and non-government 
payment platforms. Further, fee on failed USSD 
transactions should be refunded to consumers 
to enable greater participation. 
6.  Overhaul the regulatory framework 
governing formal financial products to 
attract households
• Household acceptance of formal financial 
products, such as insurance, equity, etc., can 
be increased if regulations governing these are 
simplified and made more consumer-friendly.
• Instances of mis-selling of financial products to 
households needs to be tackled by overhauling 
the regulatory framework. Disclosure 
requirements for insurance and pension 
products need to be strengthened to make it 
easier for consumers to understand them. 
• Simplification and relaxation of insurance sector 
regulations – Substantial simplification of broker 
regulations can be made. Further, restrictions on 
payment of incentives and bonuses to agents in 
insurance can be removed.
• KYC restrictions in the capital markets can be 
eased and linked to other KYC information to 
enable ease of doing business and increase the 
participation of retail investors.
• The lock-in period for gold bonds should be 
reduced to make them more attractive.
________________________________________
1 The Global Findex Database 2017, World Bank. Accessed June 14, 2018.
2 The Progress of Financial Inclusion in India: Insights from Multiple Waves of Survey Data”,  Manuela Kristin Günther, Overseas Devel-
opment Institute, 25 May 2017;  “Banking the Unbanked: What Do 255 Million New Bank Accounts Reveal about Financial Access?”, 
Sumit Agarwal, Shaswat Alok, Pulak Ghosh, Soumya Ghosh, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru,  Columbia Business School Research Paper 
No. 17-12; Georgetown McDonough School of Business Research Paper No. 2906523; HKUST Finance Symposium 2017; Indian 
School of Business WP 2906523. October 2017; “Bank Accounts for the Unbanked: Evidence from a Big Bang Experiment”, Yakshup 
Chopra, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Prasanna L. Tantri, Robert H. Smith School: Research Paper No. RHS 2919091; Indian School of 
Business WP 219109, May 2017. 
3 IMF Statistics.
4 IMF Statistics.
45
Objectives
• Provide every family with a pucca house, with 
a water connection, toilet facilities, and 24x7 
electricity supply and access.
• Build 2.95 core housing units in rural areas and 
1.2 crore housing units in urban areas.
Current Situation
The President’s clarion call to ensure the provision 
of houses to every family remains the key objective 
of the ‘Housing for All’ scheme. Following this 
announcement, the government has made it clear 
that one of its key priorities is to ensure safe and 
affordable housing for all. This mandate also 
includes upgradation of slums. Recent estimates 
of the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs indicate a housing 
shortage of nearly 3 crore units in rural areas and 
1.2 crore units in urban areas. Achieving the goal of 
‘Housing for All’ will be a big step in the realization 
of New India Vision 2022 that will trigger economic 
growth and create millions of jobs for skilled as well 
as unskilled workers. Moreover, given the forward 
and backward linkages of the housing sector, 
the focus on affordable housing could bring rich 
dividends for other distressed sectors such as steel 
and cement. 
Since 1985, the Government of India has been 
implementing a rural housing scheme for families 
living below the poverty line (BPL). A new scheme, 
the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Gramin – 
PMAY-G) was launched in 2016. This scheme now 
provides per unit assistance of INR 1,20,000/- in 
plain areas and INR 1,30,000/- in hilly states/
integrated action plan districts/difficult areas. This 
support is provided to homeless families or to 
those who live in 
kutcha houses as per the Socio-
Economic Caste Census (SECC), 2011 data. 
PMAY-G is converged with Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Gramin) and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) for the 
construction of sanitary toilets and also to provide 
the unskilled wage component. 
Under PMAY-G, it was proposed to build one crore 
rural houses in three years between 2016-17 and 
2018-19. The estimated financial requirement 
for the construction of one crore houses in these 
three years is INR 81,975 crore. During 2016-17, 
about 32.14 lakh houses were constructed. For the 
financial year 2017-18, the government set a target 
of completing 51 lakh houses; 51.38 lakh houses 
had been sanctioned and 44.54 lakh houses (i.e., 
87.29 per cent of the target) had been completed 
by the end of March 2018.
Under the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban-
PMAY-U), the mission aims to achieve the objective 
of ‘Housing for All’ by 2022 through its four pillars 
– a) in-situ slum redevelopment; b) affordable 
housing through a credit linked subsidy scheme; c) 
affordable housing in partnership between public 
and private agencies and d) subsidy for beneficiary-
led individual house construction or enhancement. 
For financial year 2017-18, the PMAY (Urban) 
9. Housing For All

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
46
targeted the sanctioning of 25 lakh houses and 
completing the construction of at least half the 
sanctioned strength. Against the mission target of 
1.2 crore, 44.36 lakh houses have been sanctioned 
and 4.01 lakh houses had been completed by the 
end of March 2018.
Constraints
The ‘Housing for All’ scheme faces the following key 
constraints: 
• Lack of access to finance from formal financial 
institutions. 
• Long-drawn out, multi-level approval system 
in urban areas in a large majority of municipal 
jurisdictions.
• For several categories of houses or those in 
particular locations, these delays are common 
even where a single window system has 
reportedly been introduced. 
• Limited private sector participation in affordable 
housing schemes in urban areas.
• Predominance of conventional construction 
practices that result in delayed progress 
in urban areas and the limited use of pre-
fabricated and pre-engineered materials.
• Limited access to suitable land banks for 
affordable housing projects.
• Continued rise in the number of slum dwellers.
• Insufficient number of trained masons despite 
the operation of the Construction Sector Skills 
Development Council since 2013.
• Capacity constraints in urban local bodies (ULBs) 
to formulate and design mass housing projects.
Figure 9.1: Multi-pronged approach to resolving constraints in the  
‘Housing for All’ scheme
2 
 Long-drawn out, multi-level approval system in  urban areas  in a large majority of 
municipal jurisdiction s 
 For several categories of houses or those in particular locations , these long delays are 
common even where a single window system has rep ortedly been introduced.  
 Limited private sector participation in affordable housing schemes in urban areas 
 Predominance of c onventional construction practi ces that result in delayed progress in 
urban areas and the limited use of pre-fabricated and pre-engineered material s 
 Limited access to suitable land banks for affordable housing projects  
 Continued rise in the number of slum dwellers  
 Unavailability of sufficient number of trained masons  despite the  operation of the 
Construction Sector S kills Development Council since 2013 
 Capacity constraints in urban local bodies  (ULBs) to formulate  and design  mass housing 
projects 
 
WAY FORWARD  
The strategies to overcome the constraints on affordable housing can be grouped into the following 
categories: 1) access to finance; 2) technology for  construction; 3) reducing costs  and 4) efficient 
use of land. 
 
Figure 1: Multi-pronged approach to resolving constraints in the ‘Housing for All’ scheme 
 
 
 
 
1. ACCESS TO FINANCE 
 To ensure greater  access for the poor to institutional finance, the Department of 
Financial Services should consider a sub -category under priority sector lendin g (PSL) 
for affordable houses. It should also consider relaxing eligibility conditions for bank 
Housing for All 
by 2022-23 
Access to 
Finance 
Technology 
for 
Construction 
Reducing 
Costs 
Efficient 
land use 
47
Way Forward 
The strategies to overcome the constraints on 
affordable housing can be grouped into the 
following categories: 1) access to finance;  
2) technology for construction; 3) reducing costs 
and 4) efficient use of land.
1. Access to finance
• To ensure greater access for the poor to 
institutional finance, the Department of 
Financial Services should consider a sub-
category under priority sector lending (PSL) 
for affordable houses. It should also consider 
relaxing eligibility conditions for bank loans 
such as raising the cap of INR 10 lakh on the 
cost of the house and raising the INR 2-lakh 
income threshold. 
• The government should continue to raise 
funds commensurate with the ‘Housing for All’ 
targets. The Union Budget 2018-19 announced 
the setting up of an Affordable Housing Fund 
in the National Housing Bank (NHB). It would 
achieve greater synergies among agencies 
that are implementing government housing 
schemes. It would also enable the NHB to 
mobilize larger funds for housing projects. The 
Budget for 2018-19 has already announced 
increased allocations for PMAY (Gramin) to INR 
33,000 crore and to INR 25,000 crore for PMAY 
(Urban) through internal and extra budgetary 
resources. 
2. Technology for construction
• Sixteen new emerging technologies have been 
identified, evaluated and promoted under 
PMAY(U). These fall under formwork systems 
(3), precast sandwich panel systems (6), 
light gauge steel structural systems (2), steel 
structural systems (2) and precast concrete 
construction systems (3). These alternate and 
sustainable technologies offer safer and disaster 
resilient affordable housing. These will also 
improve the quality of construction in a cost 
effective and environment friendly manner 
across states/regions and achieve economies of 
scale in urban areas. 
• A Global Housing Technology Challenge has 
been launched. It will bring internationally 
proven construction technologies for adoption 
in India, enabling us to learn from the best 
practices from similar economies around the 
world.
• The success of the East Kidwai Nagar 
redevelopment project in Delhi may be 
replicated wherever possible. The key feature is 
the replacement of old style public housing that 
suffered from grossly inefficient use of land with 
a modern, space optimising housing design. 
• It is necessary to ensure convergence of 
provisions under the National Urban Livelihood 
Mission, 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana, 
Construction Skill Development Council of India 
and MGNREGS (for rural areas) for large-scale 
training of masons to meet construction targets. 
• There is need for a major push in the form of 
slum development programmes in urban areas. 
A National Mission for Slum Rehabilitation will 
bring a greater focus on making the country 
slum free.
3. Reducing costs
• Government projects should focus on the life 
cycle cost (LCC) approach to the construction 
of houses rather than the cost per square foot 
approach to ensure quality of construction 
and reduce expenditure incurred on the 
maintenance of houses. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
48
• Fiscal support should be provided to companies 
that use recycled products made from 
waste. The use of such products should be 
standardized and adapted to shortlisted design 
types and pre-fabricated technologies. 
• Regulatory complexities should be rationalized 
and a single window approval system adopted 
to reduce the time taken to construct houses in 
urban areas. The timeline for granting approvals 
should be specified and if approvals are not 
accorded within the stipulated time period, it 
should be treated as deemed approval.
• Financial engineering, like ‘rental-cum-
ownership housing’ in which houses are initially 
offered on rent and ownership is transferred 
to the tenant once the cost of the unit is 
recovered, should be adopted.
4. Efficient use of land
• The land lying idle with various sick/loss making 
public sector undertakings(PSUs) of the central/
state governments may be used to resolve the 
issue of land availability for affordable housing 
projects under ‘Housing for All’.
• The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
should expedite release of land parcels 
available with central PSUs that have been 
identified for affordable housing projects. 
• As suggested in the NITI Aayog’s Three-Year 
Action Agenda, Indian cities have focused on 
horizontal growth for far too long. It should 
now focus on vertical growth. The following 
measures can be taken to accelerate vertical 
growth: 
o Launch a mass campaign to sensitize 
cities and states on the benefits of vertical 
growth.
o Provide capacity building to states and 
cities willing to undertake measures 
towards vertical growth.
o Provide considerable rewards to cities that 
relax their floor space index (FSI) norms. 
One of the key reasons behind India’s 
horizontal sprawl is stringent FSI norms. 
The discussion on changing FSI norms 
considering trunk infrastructure and other 
social issues needs to be expedited across 
India. 
o Provide additional central government 
funding to cities that undertake FSI reforms 
under the Smart Cities Mission.
In addition to the measures outlined above, urban 
governance reforms, such as removing the need to 
obtain permission for non-agricultural use in the 
case of land that has been earmarked for residential 
purposes in master plans, amending rental laws 
and others, have the potential to alleviate the 
challenges to achieving the goal of ‘Housing for All’ 
by 2022-23.   
49
Objectives
• Increase India’s share in global international 
tourist arrivals from 1.18 per cent to 3 per cent.
• Increase the number of foreign tourist arrivals 
from 8.8 million to 12 million. 
• Double the number of domestic tourist visits, 
from 1,614 million in 2016 to 3,200 million 
visits. 
Current Situation
There has been significant progress in the travel, 
tourism and hospitality sector in the last decade 
but there is much further room for improvement. 
India moved up 12 places from 52nd to 40th in 
the World Economic Forum’s Travel and Tourism 
Competitiveness Index in 2017. Foreign tourist 
arrivals have increased from 5.1 million in 2009 to 
8.8 million in 2016; yet they account for less than 
1 per cent of global tourist arrivals. With 35 world 
heritage sites, 10 bio-geographical zones and 26 
biotic provinces, India has significant potential to 
increase the number of tourist arrivals. 
The sector is an important contributor to national 
income. In 2017-18, India’s travel and tourism 
sector accounted for foreign exchange earnings 
of USD 22.92 billion. Hotels and tourism also 
accounted for USD 0.9 billion of foreign direct 
investment (FDI) in 2016-17, making up around 
3 per cent of total FDI between April 2000 and 
October 2017.
1  Domestic tourism plays a key role 
within the sector. In 2016, domestic tourist visits 
to all Indian states and union territories numbered 
1614 million, an increase of about 13 per cent from 
the previous year.
10. Travel, Tourism and Hospitality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreign Tourist Arrivals:  
8.8 Million 
Domestic Tourists Visits to all 
States/UTs: 1613.6 million 
Employment (Direct and 
Indirect): 40.3 Million 
Foreign Exchange Earnings 
from Tourism: USD 22.92 
Billion 
Travel and 
Tourism 
Figure 10.1: Contribution of travel and tourism in India, 2016
Source: Ministry of Tourism, India
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
50
As a highly labour-intensive sector, tourism has 
the capacity to generate large-scale, good quality 
employment. In 2016, it accounted for 25 million 
direct and more than 14 million indirect jobs. Direct 
jobs in the sector made up 5.8 per cent of India’s 
total employment. Together, direct and indirect jobs 
accounted for 9.3 per cent of total employment. The 
sector has multiple forward and backward linkages 
with further job generating potential in sectors such 
as agriculture, retail, transport and financial services. 
Recognizing the sector’s potential to generate 
income and employment, the government has 
undertaken several measures to strengthen 
infrastructure and facilitate tourism. India recently 
introduced tourist visa on arrival, enabled with 
electronic travel authorization (ETA) (renamed as 
the “e-Tourist Visa”) for tourists from 150 countries.2  
The Ministry of Tourism has launched a round-the-
clock, toll-free tourist helpline in 12 international 
languages. The government has launched several 
schemes to develop tourist circuits; develop our 
islands as tourist destinations; build large-scale 
convention centres in different cities; improve 
connectivity and develop niche offerings such as 
medical tourism and pilgrimage-based tourism.
Constraints
• Entry/exit: Despite the introduction of an e-visa 
facility, visitors find the process of applying for a 
visa still cumbersome. Further, awareness about 
the e-visa facility remains low. In addition, 
medical e-visa holders face difficulties because 
of the limited number of repeat visits allowed 
under the visa, the number of accompanying 
persons permitted and cumbersome registration 
processes.
• Infrastructure and connectivity: Deficiencies 
in infrastructure and inadequate connectivity 
hamper tourist visits to some heritage sites.
• Tourism segments or circuits: India has 
various tourist destinations but few circuits or 
segments such as the Golden Triangle (Delhi-
Agra-Jaipur).
• Promotion and marketing: Although it has 
been increasing, online marketing/branding 
remains limited and campaigns are not 
coordinated. Tourist information centres are 
poorly managed, making it difficult for domestic 
and foreign tourists to access information with 
ease.
• Skills: The number of adequately trained indi-
viduals for the tourism and hospitality sector is 
a key challenge to giving visitors a world-class 
experience. A limited number of multi-lingual 
trained guides, and the limited local awareness 
and understanding of the benefits and respon-
sibilities associated with tourist growth act as 
constraints on the sector’s growth.
Way Forward
1. Entry/exit for tourism
• Increase e-visa awareness globally by 
launching an information campaign through 
our consulates abroad. It is also necessary to 
launch an e-visa regime to attract clientele 
from the meetings, incentives, conferences and 
exhibitions (MICE) market. To attract repeat 
visitors, the validity period of e-visas may be 
increased to 10 years. 
• Enhance the number of annual visits allowed 
under an e-medical visa. Currently, e-medical 
visa holders are allowed three repeat visits 
during their one-year visa period. This may not 
be sufficient for patients who require follow-up/
post-operative care.
o Simplify the process of registering online 
with the Foreigner Regional Registration 
51
Offices (FRRO). Establishing FRRO help-
desks at major Indian airports and hospi-
tals will provide visitors with the informa-
tion to complete the process online.
o Increase the number of accompanying 
persons with e-medical visa holders from 
two to up to four under the same visa, as 
has been done in countries like Malaysia. 
 2. Infrastructure and connectivity 
• Tourism infrastructure projects, viz., hotels, 
resorts, equipment, parks etc., having a project 
cost more than INR 1 crore should be notified 
as ‘infrastructure’ to enable promoters to avail 
loans on a priority basis.
• Conservation and development of all heritage 
sites should be undertaken and completed 
through either government funding or 
through NGOs/Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) activities. The Ministry of Tourism’s 
Swadesh Darshan and National Mission on 
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage 
Augmentation Drive (PRASHAD) schemes 
are already undertaking the development or 
maintenance of heritage sites.
3,4 The number 
of projects sanctioned under this scheme 
should be increased and their implementation 
accelerated.
• Increase domestic tourist traffic by upgrading 
existing infrastructure and leasing out the main-
tenance of such infrastructure to private players. 
New destinations can be developed around the 
metros using the PPP model.
• Improve flight connectivity to tourist destina-
tions through the timely implementation of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation’s Regional Connectivity 
Scheme – UDAN (RCS-UDAN). Larger cities like 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai should be 
converted into efficient and seamless transit hubs. 
3. Building tourist circuits or segments
• Develop the marine leisure industry by issuing 
national boating guidelines to regulate the 
industry in terms of safety, security, marina 
development, nautical infrastructure for safe 
access to water, cruising and charters, crewing 
(skill training), rescue and rationalization of 
import duties and local taxes to encourage the 
growth of local boat building. This segment will 
also help attract additional FDI into the sector.
• Promote river cruise tourism by making the 
entire stretch of National Waterway No. 1, the 
River Ganga, from Allahabad to the Farakkah 
Barrage, fully navigable.
• Build deep-water marinas in the coastal areas 
of India including in the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands and in Mumbai. Create enabling policies 
that permit scuba diving or other activities 
requiring boat travel.
• Promote India’s Buddhist circuit by increas-
ing coordination among all stakeholders and 
improving connectivity. Tourism to the Buddhist 
circuit can be greatly enhanced by increasing 
promotion, building wayside amenities and 
connecting lesser-known sites to core circuits. 
We should also fully utilize the 
Swadesh 
Darshan and existing schemes to promote this 
circuit.
• Develop 100 “Smart Tourist Destination Sites” 
showcasing theme-based museums and heri-
tage sites.
• Develop 100 “Model Swachh Tourist Destina-
tions” by undertaking a special clean-up initia-
tive focused on 100 iconic heritage, spiritual 
and cultural places in the country.
• Develop at least five “Beach Destinations” as 
exclusive tourism zones.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
52
• Develop at least five “World Class Museums” 
drawing from world class museums such 
as Bilbao or the Asian Civilization Museum 
in Singapore. Further, ease the process of 
accepting gifts by museums in India.
• Plan and develop five globally competitive and 
world-class national circuits from entry to exit.
4. Skill development 
• Connect local communities to tourism by en-
couraging them to set up small enterprises to 
supply the tourism industry (accommodation, 
food and material). Employment opportunities 
can be expanded by ensuring that investors and 
operators in the organized sector are encour-
aged to hire staff locally.
• Local craftspersons, masons, carpenters and 
labourers should be engaged for heritage conser-
vation and restoration activities to create jobs.
• Create a database of artisans based on the dif-
ferent craft forms they are associated with and 
the areas where they live.
• Upgrade the skills of existing workers such as 
taxi drivers, boat operators, guides, and restau-
rant and dhaba workers through state tourism 
departments in association with local tourism 
and hospitality institutes and industry. 
o Expertise available with heritage hotels 
may also be used for skill development in 
the sector. 
o Language competencies of tour guides 
should be improved through a bridge 
course conducted by the sector council all 
across the country.
• Support private sector institutes in tourism 
regulated by government to create the required 
talent pool. This can be done by expanding the 
number of private sector institutes or bodies 
recognized as implementing agencies for 
delivering the Ministry of Tourism’s
 Hunar Se 
Rozgar Tak initiative to create employable skills.
• Create Centres of Excellence for leadership in 
the tourism sector as a fulcrum of professional 
education, research and advocacy to create 
managers and entrepreneurs in tourism. 
Additionally, ensure that tourism management 
and leadership is included as a distinct course in 
top management institutes in India.
• Enable access to markets for traditional 
handicrafts producers by linking them with 
global markets. The government should also 
encourage the export of tribal handicrafts.
5. Promotion and marketing, especially with 
respect to cultural sites
• Launch targeted promotional campaigns 
in Asian countries such as China, Thailand, 
Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea, using 
digital media including TV advertisements.
• Design policies using data on consumer usage 
to target marketing efforts and segments of the 
population. 
• Reconsider differential pricing for heritage 
sites as the higher ticket price for non-Indians 
leads to losing out on a large segment of youth 
travellers.
• Consider establishing cultural centres in 
additional countries to spread Indian culture 
worldwide.
• Create an online portal of all heritage sites to 
increase awareness regarding these.
• Ticketing and access to monuments and 
museums.
53
o An online ticket distribution system for 
heritage sites and wild life areas should be 
developed with time slots to visit.
o Buying tickets at reception centres should 
be streamlined to avoid long queues.
o Create common passes to visit multiple 
heritage sites. 
o Provide foreign exchange counters at each 
tourist site.
o Tourist information centres should be 
operated by trained personnel and must 
have resources like maps, travel guides, 
etc.
________________________________________
1 Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
2 Ministry of Tourism Annual Report 2015-16, Government of India.
3 Ministry of Tourism, Swadesh Darshan Scheme website. Accessed May 12, 2018.
 http://www.swadeshdarshan.gov.in/
4 Ministry of Tourism, Brochure for PRASAD scheme. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 http://tourism.gov.in/sites/default/files/News/PRASAD%20Low%20Res%20-17_3_205_compressed.pdf
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
54
Objectives
• Double the area explored from 10 per cent of 
obvious geological potential (OGP) area to 20 
per cent.1
• Accelerate the growth of the mining sector from 
3 per cent in 2017-18 to 14 per cent, with an 
average growth of 8.5 per cent during 2018-23.
• Increase the job contribution (direct, associated 
and indirect) from the current 10 million (2 
million in coal and major metals and 8 million 
in minor minerals) to 15 million in 2022-23.
Current Situation
India has huge mineral potential, as its prospective 
geology is broadly similar to that of Western 
Australia, especially in relation to iron ore, bauxite, 
coal, diamonds, and heavy minerals sand. India 
has identified 5.71 lakh sq. km as the obvious 
geological potential (OGP) area, but only 10 per 
cent of it has been explored and 1.5 per cent is 
being mined. 
This is one of the reasons why India’s imports 
of minerals, estimated at INR 3,73,662 crore, far 
outstripped, more than seven times, the value of 
domestic production of minerals (excluding coal, 
atomic and fuel minerals) of INR 47,432 crore in the 
financial year 2016-17.
2 India’s share in the global 
production of metallic minerals, such as bauxite, 
chromite, iron ore and manganese ore is relatively 
high; India is ranked 4th to 6th among global 
producers. In industrial minerals, India is a large 
producer of zinc, aluminium and steel, ranking 5th, 
5th and 3rd respectively.
Six major minerals producing states, viz., Odisha 
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and 
Karnataka, account for nearly two-thirds of the 
value of minerals produced in the country.
3 
In addition to the above, India also has large 
potential to increase the production of minor 
minerals. It is estimated that their share in the 
value of production is about 26 per cent.
4  Even 
though minor minerals have a small share in 
value terms, their production is more labour 
intensive as compared to major minerals. Thus, 
they can be a source of large-scale employment 
generation.
The sector has been affected by legalities. This has 
restricted the scope of mining operations and raised 
costs.
In 2015, the government amended the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) 
Act to mandate auctions for the allocation of 
exploration and mining rights for minerals under its 
purview. The results have been encouraging. 
Constraints
• Shortcomings in the licensing regime such 
as the separation of auction of prospecting 
licences and provision of mining licences, and 
the different auction methodologies across 
different sectors like coal, oil and minerals.
11. Minerals 

55
Figure 11.1: India’s share in world production, 2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.1% 
9.6% 
8.2% 
4.7% 
4.0% 
0.6% 
0.6% 
4.1% 
3.5% 
5.6% 
1.4% 
5.7% 
0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12%
Coal & Lignite
Bauxite
Chromite
Iron Ore
Manganese Ore
Magnesite
Apatite & Rock Phospate
Aluminium
Copper (Refined)
Steel
Lead
Zinc (Slab)
India's share (%) 
Category 
Source: Ministry of Mines
• Heavy cost of acquiring land.
• High incidence of taxes, royalties and levies in 
comparison to global standards (more than 65 
per cent).
• Inadequate infrastructure resulting in 
evacuation problems.
• Workforce productivity and skilling challenges 
because of the disconnect between training 
institutions and industry.
Way Forward
1. To facilitate participation by private 
sector players in exploration, launch a 
mission “Explore in India”, by revamping 
the minerals exploration and licensing 
policy
 The policy should have the following features:
• For bulk or surfacial minerals, i.e., iron-
ore, bauxite, limestone etc, the provision of 
“reservation” of areas for exploration by state 
agencies should be utilised and such areas 
should be allocated through the auction route 
after the development of reserves.
• It is desirable for public sector units (PSUs) 
and private sector companies to have a 
level-playing field with respect to mining 
concessions.
• An exclusive subset of rules to facilitate the 
exploration of rare earth minerals through 
private sector participation should be framed.
• Mining companies should be allowed the 
freedom to co-mine other minerals found in the 
same mining area.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
56
• To promote this sector we need to rationalize 
tax structures and facilitate investment 
including FDI. This would help both export 
promotion and import substitution. 
2. Single window and time-bound environment 
and forest clearances
• While 
PARIVESH has been launched on 
August 10, 2018 as a single window hub 
for environment, forest, wildlife and CRZ 
clearances, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest (MoEF) should declare upfront inviolate 
forest areas. This should specify whether 
underground mining or open cast mining can 
be done or not in these areas.
• All statutory approvals should mandatorily 
be granted within 180 days of application for 
exploration and mining of minerals. Further, 
a provision for the issue of deemed approval 
letters by a competent authority should be 
incorporated in cases where delay beyond the 
specified period has occurred.
• Local forest officers may be empowered to 
grant permission under the FC Act, 1980 for 
exploration in forest areas.
• State PSUs and the private sector should 
also be allowed to undertake compensatory 
afforestation on degraded government 
forestland like central PSUs.
3. Boosting minor minerals through a relaxed 
licensing regime
• Landowners/farmers/tribals need to be given 
mining rights for minor minerals on their land, to 
enable them to mine either on their own or by 
outsourcing it, without auction or payment of an 
additional 30 per cent of the royalty to the DMF .
• If the landowner does not intend to undertake 
mining of minor minerals on her land, these 
mining leases can be allocated through the 
auction route. 
4. Data repository, regulation and reporting
• A National Mineral Regulatory Authority, with 
subordinate state authorities, may be created 
to regulate the minerals sector to operate 
transparently with internationally recognized 
technical standards.
• A National Data Repository (NDR) of Mineral 
Resources should be created and uploaded 
online.
• Introduce a robust and transparent public 
reporting mechanism for exploration firms, 
which is compliant with the Joint Ore Resources 
Committee (JORC) code or an equivalent code in 
the statute.
• The huge mineral bearing areas reserved for 
state agencies that have not been utilized for 
more than 2 years should be de-reserved and 
allocated to the end user industry/ auctioned.
• Instead of field inspections, a system of self-
approval/self-certification with GIS based 
monitoring should be adopted for enforcing 
the provisions of the MMDR Act. This should 
be accompanied with a provision for heavy 
monetary penalties for each violation.
5. Other measures
• Immediate steps should be taken to reduce 
rail freight charges for all minerals that are 
available in India in abundance but are 
imported because it is currently uneconomical 
to transport them by rail.
• Rationalize taxation/royalty and other levies 
on mining, capping it at a maximum of 40 per 
cent of the sale value, as per global practice, to 
make mining competitive globally.
57
• Mining engineering colleges should be 
developed as centres for mineral exploration.
• Encourage technological upgradation by 
reducing import duty, initially for a period of 
five to ten years, on equipment/cutting edge 
technology to boost safety, limit environmental 
damage, improve productivity and increase 
growth.
• To enhance the resource base and ensure 
mineral security, India should create an 
organization for strategic acquisitions of mines 
in other countries and to sign diplomatic and 
trade agreements.
• Promote zero waste mining by incentivizing 
leaseholders to utilize and sell sub-grade 
minerals/rejects.
• As per the provision of Section 8A (6) of MMDR 
Act, 2015, the 50-year or more lease granted to 
288 non-captive mines will end on March 31, 
2020. To ensure smooth transition in 2020 and 
to avoid disruption in mineral supplies and job 
losses, the Ministry of Mines should complete 
the process of bidding for these mines one year 
before the date of expiry.
________________________________________
1 This chapter includes all minerals, except for oil and gas resources.
2 Annual Report 2017-18, Ministry of Mines (import figures for gold taken from Ministry of Commerce).
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid (major minerals include coal also).
INFRASTRUCTURE
61
Objectives
The government’s on-going energy sector 
policies aim “to provide access to affordable, 
reliable, sustainable and modern energy”. At the 
convergence of its domestic goals and the global 
development agenda, it also intends to hit the 
following milestones on the way –
• Make available 24x7 power to all by 2019.
• Achieve 175 GW of renewable energy 
generation capacity by 2022.
• Reduce imports of oil and gas by 10 per cent by 
2022-23.
• Continue to reduce emission intensity of GDP 
in a manner that will help India achieve the 
intended nationally determined contribution 
(INDC) target of 2030.
Current Situation
India’s energy mix is dominated by coal with 
a 49.6 per cent share, followed by oil (28 per 
cent), biomass (11.6 per cent), gas (7.3 per cent), 
renewable and clean energy (2.2 per cent) and 
nuclear energy (1.2 per cent). India is the world’s 
third largest energy consumer. However, in 2017, 
its per capita energy consumption was about 625.6 
kilogram of oil equivalent (kgoe) against the world 
average of 1860 kgoe. The US and China’s per 
capita energy consumption in 2015 was 6800 kgoe 
and 2170 kgoe, respectively. 
In the power sector, the all-India installed power 
capacity is about 334 GW, including 62 GW of 
renewable energy. The energy sub-sectors continue 
to face challenges. On energy supply, India is still 
heavily dependent on petroleum imports to meet 
its requirements – we imported approximately 82 
per cent of crude oil and 45 per cent of natural 
gas requirements during 2017. Also, at present, 
about 16000 km of gas pipeline networks exist. 
The progress of 10,000 Km of pipeline bid out 
by Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB), which was to be completed by 2016-17, is 
behind schedule. 
In the coal sector, the government has recently in 
2018 allowed commercial mining. Furthermore, 
power sector companies, especially state 
government utilities, continue to deal with difficult 
financial positions. 
Due to energy efficiency (EE) measures, demand 
side management (DSM) and advanced technology 
in the energy value chain, India’s energy intensity 
declined from 0.158 koe/$ in 2005 to 0.122 koe/$ 
in 2016 at 2005 prices, indicating an efficiency 
increase of 22.8 per cent. The energy intensity of 
the UK and Germany in the year 2016 were 0.074 
koe/$ and 0.101 koe/$ at 2005 prices, respectively. 
This indicates that India still has the potential to 
improve energy efficiency.
Constraints
The constraints on achieving the milestones set for 
2022-23 can be divided into two broad categories – 
overall energy sector and sub-sector specific.
12. Energy

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
62
1. Overall energy
Subsidies and taxes: 
• A variety of subsidies and taxes distort 
the energy market and promote the use of 
inefficient over efficient fuels.
• They also make Indian exports and domestic 
production uncompetitive as energy taxes are 
not under GST and hence, no input credit is 
given. This is a serious lacuna. 
2. Power
• Old inefficient plants continue to operate 
whereas more efficient plants are underutilized.
• As the gap between the average cost of 
supply (ACS) and average revenue realized 
(ARR) persists due to high aggregate technical 
and commercial (AT&C) losses, distribution 
companies (DISCOMs) use load shedding to 
minimize losses.
• Although legally independent, Regulatory 
Commissions are unable to fully regulate 
discoms and fix rational tariffs.
• Unmetered power supply to agriculture 
provides no incentive to farmers to use 
electricity efficiently.
• There is a lot of hidden demand because of 
unreliable supply and load shedding.
• State power utilities are not able to invest in 
system improvements due to their poor financial 
health.
• High industrial/commercial tariff and the 
cross-subsidy regime have affected the 
competitiveness of the industrial and commercial 
sectors.
3.  Oil & gas
• Non-discriminatory access for private and public 
sector companies to the gas pipeline network 
does not exist.
• Lack of market-driven gas prices for old fields 
disincentivizes further production.
• The gas pipeline infrastructure is also 
inadequate.
4.  Coal
• Land for coal mining is becoming a major issue.
• There is a tendency to expand opencast mining 
and discourage underground operation even for 
better quality coal reserves. This aggravates the 
land availability problem.
• There is no competitive coal market.
5.  Renewable energy
• High energy costs result in reneging on old 
power purchase agreements (PPAs) and 
erode their sanctity. This leads to uncertainty 
regarding power offtake and consequently 
endangers further investments.
• Flexibility in generation and balance 
requirements for the integration of renewable 
energy are emerging as major issues.
• There are supply chain issues in biomass power 
generation.
6. Energy efficiency
• Limited technical capabilities, high initial capital 
expenditure, limited market and policy issues 
have adversely affected efforts to achieve 
energy efficiency. 
63
• High transaction costs (which involves 
appointing suitable consultants and vendors for 
execution) relative to project size, especially in 
the micro, small-scale and medium enterprises 
(MSME) sector, makes energy efficiency 
investments unattractive for investors.
• The non-availability of sufficient credit facilities 
and difficulties in obtaining required finances 
for energy saving projects are strong deterrents 
to investments in energy efficiency in India.
Way Forward
1. Overall energy
• Oil, natural gas, electricity and coal may be 
brought under GST to enable input tax credit.
• Have the same GST rate for all forms of energy 
to enable a level playing field.
• All form of subsidies should be provided as 
functional subsidies to end-consumers to 
empower them to choose the energy form most 
suitable and economical to them.
2. Power
• Promote smart grid and smart meters.
• All PPAs including those with state generation 
companies (GENCOs) should be based on 
competitive bidding.
• Introduce a capacity market to encourage 
flexible capacity for peak demand and 
intermittency.
Figure 12.1: Strategies for improving the energy sector in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY 
Overall 
energy 
Power 
Oil & Gas 
 Coal 
Renewable 
Energy 
Energy 
Efficiency 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
64
• Privatizing state distribution utilities and/or the 
use of a franchisee model will reduce AT&C 
losses.
• Discoms may adopt a franchisee model for its 
retail business in rural areas and stipulate a 
minimum level of performance parameters, 
including the use of decentralized generation 
sources and storage systems for local reliability 
and resilience.
• Regulatory bodies need to be further 
strengthened and made truly independent.
• For agriculture, an upfront subsidy per acre 
of land through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
may be considered instead of providing 
separate subsidies for fertilizers, electricity, crop 
insurance etc.
• Promote the use of solar pumps for agriculture. 
Local discoms should buy surplus power from 
the farmer.
• Discoms may be fined for load shedding.
• Ensure effective enforcement of a cap on cross-
subsidy and open access. It is also necessary to 
remove high open access charges.
• Actively promote cross-border electricity trade 
to utilize existing/upcoming generation assets.
• Introduce time-of-day tariff to promote the use 
of renewable energy.
• Introduce performance-based incentives in the 
tariff structure.
• To manage the demand for power, it is 
necessary to introduce 100 per cent metering, 
net metering, smart meters, and metering of 
electricity supplied to agriculture.
3.  Oil & gas
• Provide for a common carrier and open access 
to gas pipelines.
• Separate the developmental and regulatory 
functions of the PNGRB.
• Expedite establishing the National Gas Grid.
• Promote city gas distribution to provide piped 
natural gas (PNG).
• Review and provide the required flexibility in 
contract terms to make stranded oil and gas 
assets functional.
• Enhance production from the existing 
fields of ONGC and OIL using cutting-edge 
technology through a framework of production 
enhancement contracts.
• Consider market pricing for blocks that are not 
viable because of low gas pricing.
• Provide for shared infrastructure for evacuation 
of oil and gas from small and scattered on-
shore and offshore fields.
• Provide “priority sector” status for 2G bio-
ethanol projects. The concept of ‘solar parks’ 
can be applied to bio-fuels; land can be leased 
by the government to oil marketing companies 
(OMCs) for energy crops.
• The government should provide viability gap 
funding/financial assistance for 2G ethanol 
project developers/technology partners.
• Declare regasified liquefied natural gas (R-LNG) 
as transportation fuel and promote PNG in rural 
areas.
• Create strategic reserves through various policy 
options.
4.  Coal
• Expeditiously complete detailed exploration 
through exploration-cum-mining leases based 
on production/revenue sharing model.
• Put the onus on concerned state governments 
to make the land required for mining available.
65
• Expeditiously operationalize commercial coal 
mining.
5.  Renewable energy
• Provide a mechanism for cost-effective power 
grid balancing (gas-based, hydro or storage).
• Renewable purchase obligations (RPO) should 
be strictly enforced and inter-state sale of 
renewable energy should be facilitated.
• It is necessary to have national level markets 
and regulations for balancing of power. Central 
level agencies like Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission or National Load Despatch Centre 
should socialize the costs of balancing inter-
state transmission systems (ISTS) connected 
power plants, over the entire system, on the 
lines of the point of connection (PoC) or a 
similar mechanism.
• Decentralized renewable energy in rural areas 
in conjunction with the discoms’ grid can offer 
reliability. 
• Hybrid renewable energy systems such as solar 
PV + biomass should be explored.
• Commercial biogas needs to be promoted by 
providing subsidy to consumers.
6.  Energy efficiency
• The Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) should 
come out with a white paper on its 5-year 
strategy on energy efficiency in various sectors 
and specify energy consumption norms. 
• State designated agencies (SDAs) need to be 
more empowered and provided with adequate 
resources to implement EE related programmes. 
There is a need to ensure greater participation 
of energy service companies (ESCOs) using 
appropriate financing models with a risk sharing 
mechanism, particularly by public sector banks.
• States should adopt the second version of the 
Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) 
in their building by-laws and ensure faster 
implementation. 
• Promote the mandatory use of LED and the 
replacement of old appliances in government 
buildings with five-star appliances. Focus the 
UJALA (Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All) 
programme on lower-income households and 
small commercial establishments. The number 
of appliances covered under the Standards and 
Labelling (S&L) programme should be increased. 
• Widen and deepen the perform, achieve and 
trade (PAT) programme; make Energy Saving 
Certificate (ESCert) trading under the PAT 
scheme effective by ensuring strict penalties 
against defaulters.
• For the MSME sector, BEE should develop 
cluster-specific programmes for energy 
intensive industries to introduce energy efficient 
technologies.
• The Forum of Regulators and State Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) should provide 
for lower heat rate requirements for new power 
stations. Old and inefficient plants consuming 
more than the threshold energy should be 
retired in a phased manner. 
• Promote the use of the public transport system. 
Public transport systems may be converted to 
electric in a time bound manner. Expand the 
corporate average fuel efficiency standards 
(CAFE) beyond passenger cars to other vehicle 
segments.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
66
Objectives
Increasing the coverage and quality of roads and 
highways is critical to enhancing connectivity and 
internal and external trade. By 2022-23, we should 
achieve the following objectives:
• Increase connectivity by expanding the road 
network: 
o Achieve the Bharatmala Phase-I target 
by completing 24,800 km by 2021-22, 
including 2,000 km of coastal and port 
connectivity roads.1 
o Complete Phase I of the Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) with quality 
monitoring at every stage.
o Double the length of national highways 
(NHs) to 2 lakh km by 2022-23 from the 
existing 1.22 lakh km.
o Widen single/intermediate lane (SL/IL) 
NHs and reduce the length of SL/IL NHs 
to less than 10 per cent of total length 
by 2022-23 from the present 26.46 per 
cent.
2 
• Improve the regulatory framework for roads 
to achieve better compliance, seamless 
connectivity, road safety and quality.
• As a signatory to the Brasilia Declaration, 
reduce the number of road accidents and 
fatalities by 50 per cent by 2020.
3 
13. Surface Transport
Figure 13.1: Total number of registered vehicles in India (millions) 
 
58.9 Million 
182.4 Million 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2001-02 2012-13
Number of Registered Vehicles (Millions) 
11% CAGR 
Source: TERI, 2015-16
67
Current Situation
The road sector in India accounts for the largest 
share in the movement of both passengers and 
freight. Driven by a rapidly growing economy, 
access to vehicle finance and improved road 
connectivity, the demand for mobility on roads has 
risen continuously, leading to a sharp rise in the 
number of road transport vehicles. The total number 
of registered vehicles in India increased from 58.9 
million in 2001-02 to 182.4 million in 2012-13,4  a 
CAGR of almost 11 per cent during this period.
However, access to and quality of public 
transportation need continuous improvement. 
In urban areas, the increasing use of personal 
vehicular transport leads to road congestion, longer 
journey times and higher levels of air and noise 
pollution. Expansion of the public transport fleets 
has been hampered by the short supply of vehicles 
– the total demand for buses was approximately 
3.40 lakh in FY 2017, while the availability/supply 
was only about 1 lakh.
Constraints
1. Capacity of existing highways: The existing 
length of the NH network is 1.22 lakh km, 
which is 2.2 per cent of the country’s total road 
network of 56.03 lakh km.5  The existing NH 
length with 4-lane and above NH standards 
is 27,658 km (22.59 per cent), and that with 
single/intermediate lane (SL/IL) width is 32,395 
km (26.46 per cent); the remaining 62,379 
km (50.95 per cent) is of 2-lane NH standard.
6  
Further, national and state highways are already 
overstrained, carrying more than 65 per cent of 
the road traffic. National highways carry 40 per 
cent of India’s total road traffic.
7 
2. Maintenance of existing infrastructure: The 
annual outlay earmarked for maintenance and 
repair of national highway stretches8  is only 
about 40 per cent of the funds required. This is 
one of the main reasons for the inability to take 
up timely maintenance interventions.  
3. Accidents and safety concerns: Road safety 
is a major issue in the country with nearly 400 
road related deaths being recorded daily. In 
2013, India had an accident death rate of 18.9 
for every 100,000 people, higher than other 
South Asian countries such as Bangladesh 
(11.6), Mauritius (12.2) and Sri Lanka (13.7).
9  
At least a part of the fatalities is because of the 
poor quality of roads. 
4. Cost escalation for roads: Delays in acquiring 
land can affect project costs as the average cost 
of land has escalated from Rs. 0.80 crore per 
hectare during 2012-13 to Rs. 3.20 crore per 
hectare during 2017-18.
Way Forward
1. Increase connectivity by expanding the road 
network
• Four projects to be undertaken:
o 
Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase-I: complete 
24,800-km by 2021-22.10 
o Special Accelerated Road Development 
Programme for the North-Eastern region 
(SARDP-NE), Phase ‘ A ’: improve about 
4,099 km in the North-East.
o ‘North-East Road Network Connectivity 
Project Phase I’: improve infrastructure 
in Meghalaya and Mizoram and enhance 
connectivity with inter-state roads and 
international borders.
11
o Chardham Mahamarg Vikas Pariyojna.
• Improve the implementation capacity of states’/
UTs’ public work departments (PWDs) through 
institutional strengthening and training. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
68
o A dedicated Metropolitan Urban Transport 
Authority in each city with a population of 
more than 1 million by 2022-23 is needed. 
o Similarly, set up dedicated cells for integrated 
planning, coordination and delivery of 
transport services in smaller cities.
2. Improve road maintenance and safety
• Maintain NH assets by adopting a mainte-
nance management system (MMS). Earmark 
funds from the Central Road Fund (CRF) for 
maintenance activities. India should begin with 
earmarking 10 per cent of its annual budget for 
road and highways for maintenance to move to-
wards the developed country norm of earmark-
ing 40 per cent to 50 per cent of the budget for 
roads and highways for maintenance.
• Build in heavy penalties on contractors for poor 
quality of operations and maintenance (O&M) 
into contracts across all contract modes. 
• Eliminate 789  black spots identified by the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(MORTH) by March 2020 by constructing 
permanent structures such as flyovers/vehicular 
underpasses (VUPs) and pedestrian underpasses 
(PUPs). Of these spots, 136 are on state roads 
and need to be dealt with by state governments. 
• The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016, 
pending before the 
Rajya Sabha, must be 
passed without delay. Constitute a National 
Safety Board to enforce road safety rules. 
3. Streamline land acquisition
• Ensure that MORTH’s 
Bhoomi Rashi web 
portal, which is integrated with the Ministry of 
Finance’s Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS), is fully functional by March 2019. 
• Sensitize stakeholders to iron out details of 
land acquisitions like determining market 
value, deciding a compensation amount, dis-
bursement of compensation, etc., as detailed 
in the 2017 guidelines issued by MORTH, 
which covered various aspects of the Right to 
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
(RFCTLARR) Act, 2013, and The National High-
ways Act, 1956.
4. Skill development
• Introduce vocational training courses on road 
construction in Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs).
• Collaborate with original equipment 
manufacturers and other stakeholders to set 
up driving training centres (DTCs) to train 
commercial vehicle drivers.
• Ensure stringent testing of driving skills 
before granting driving licences by adopting 
technologically advanced methods such as the 
automated driving testing system.
• MORTH has targeted training more than one 
lakh workers employed in various projects by 
June 2018 and a further 2.5 lakh workers by 
2019 under its programme.
5. Increase emphasis on research and 
development
• Earmark 0.1 per cent of MORTH’s annual 
budget for R&D. 
• Establish a transport data centre at the national 
level for applied research on roads.  
• Enhance R&D on IT-enabled traffic management 
systems.
• Develop new materials/techniques for 
construction. 
• Periodically revise codes/standards/guidelines 
related to technology use in line with the latest 
technological developments in the highways 
sector and disseminate codal provisions. 
69
6. Increase the capacity and reach of public 
transport
• Transform state road transport undertakings 
(SRTUs) and promote public transport, rural 
transport and last mile connectivity. 
• Additional funding for public transportation 
and the creation of interoperable systems will 
help expand the reach and capacity of public 
transport.
• The central government will work with states to 
develop bus ports and provide support on tech-
nologies/software such as 
VAHAN (for vehicle 
registration) and Saarthi (for driving licences).
7. Expand the reach of the electronic toll 
collection (ETC) system
• Complete the setup of ‘FASTag’, which employs 
radio-frequency identification, for ETC in all 
lanes for the 418 toll plazas with the National 
Highway Authority of India (NHAI) by March 31, 
2019. ETC should be interoperable across toll 
plazas on all national and state highways.
• Streamline the ‘FASTag’ charging system.
• Engage with stakeholders and concessionaires 
(for PPP toll plazas) to ensure that all toll plazas 
have the requisite infrastructure for ETC. 
8. Complete targets for rural connectivity 
• Phase-I of PMGSY should be completed by 
March 2019. The total length under the LWE 
(Left Wing Extremism) programme of 5400 km 
must be completed by March 2020.
• Beyond 2020, we should focus on building last 
mile connectivity.
9. Increase technology adoption and seamless 
movement between different modes of 
transport
• Urban mobility must move towards multimodal 
solutions by ensuring seamless movement 
between different modes.
• Identify and develop multimodal logistics 
parks (MMLP) to ensure seamless movement of 
freight.
• Encourage the road freight industry to adopt 
innovative technologies through incentives.
________________________________________
1 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Press Information Bureau. Accessed April 24, 2018.
 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=17193
2 Ibid.
3 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=142444. Accessed April 25, 2018.
4 TERI Energy & Environment Data Diary and Yearbook (TEDDY) 2015-16.
5 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 These include national highway stretches not covered under any programme or of completed stretches where no liability devolves on 
the contractor to maintain these.
9 World Health Organization “Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015”.
10 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Press Information Bureau Archive. Accessed May 11, 2018.
 http://pibarchive.nic.in/ndagov/Comprehensive-Materials/compr5.pdf.
11 Ibid.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
70
Objectives
By 2022-23, India should have a rail network that 
is not only efficient, reliable and safe, but is also 
cost-effective and accessible, both with respect to 
the movement of people and goods. This requires 
achieving the following objectives:
• Augment the capacity of existing railway 
infrastructure.
• Increase the speed of infrastructure creation 
from the present 7 km/day to 19 km/day by 
2022-23.1 
• Achieve “100 per cent”2  electrification of broad 
gauge track by 2022-23 from the 40 per cent 
level in 2016-17.
• Increase the average speed of freight and mail/
express trains to 50 km/hr (from about 24 km/hr 
in 2016-17) and 80 km/hr (from about 60 km/
hr), respectively.
3 
• Improve the safety of the railways, achieving 
zero fatalities from the 2016-17 level of 238 
fatalities and reducing the number of accidents 
from the 73 recorded in 2017-18.
4 
• Enhance service delivery, achieving 95 per cent 
on-time arrivals by 2022-23.5 
• By 2022-23, the railways should have a freight 
load of 1.9 billion tonnes and an improved 
modal share of 40 per cent of freight movement 
from the current level of 33 per cent.6  
• Increase the share of non-fare revenues in total 
revenue to 20 per cent.
Current Situation
The Indian Railways (IR) is the fourth largest 
network in the world in terms of route km (67,368 
km in FY17).
7  It is also the largest passenger 
(1,150 billion-passenger km in FY17)8  and fourth 
largest freight (620 billion net-tonne km in FY17)9  
transporting railway system globally. In FY17, 
13,329
10  passenger trains carried over 22.24 
million11  passengers daily, i.e., almost equivalent 
to Australia’s population, while the freight 
transported was 1.1 billion tonnes.
12  During FY07-
FY17, railways’ revenue increased at a CAGR of 
5.7 per cent to USD 25.1 billion
13  in FY17, led by 
strong demand, increasing urbanization and rising 
incomes. 
Despite its extensive reach and the substantial 
growth in freight load, the modal share of railways 
in the transportation of surface freight has declined 
from 86.2 per cent in 1950-51
14  to 33 per cent in 
2015, in part due to a shortfall in carrying capacity 
and lack of price competitiveness. IR’s golden 
quadrilateral and its diagonals make up only 15 
per cent of the total route of the railways but it 
transports 52 per cent of passenger traffic and 
58 per cent of total freight load.15  This highlights 
the high saturation and over-utilized capacity on 
popular routes. Since passenger and freight traffic 
move on the same tracks in India, we have not been 
able to increase speed or capacity in a significant 
manner relative to global benchmarks.
14. Railways

71
Figure 14.1: Growth of Indian Railways, 1950-51 to 2013-14
Source: ‘Indian Railways: Lifeline of the nation (A White Paper)’ February 2015  
A: Route Km Increase Over Time B: Passenger Km Increase Over Time
The expenditure on the railways as a percentage 
of transport expenditure declined from 56 per 
cent in 1985-90 (7th plan) to 30 per cent in 2007-
12 (11th plan).16  Despite its contribution to the 
overall economy, under-investment in the sector 
has crippled operations and hampered capacity 
augmentation. From 1950-51 to 2013-14, the 
route km increased by only 23 per cent against the 
growth in freight and passenger km of 1,344 per 
cent and 1,642 per cent respectively.
17 
The government has recognized the need for 
additional investment in rail infrastructure and 
scaled up investment by almost three times, from 
INR 53,989 crore in 2013-14 to INR 1.47 lakh 
crore18  in 2018-19 (BE). 
Constraints
1. Congested networks: Over-stretched 
infrastructure with 60 per cent plus routes being 
more than 100 per cent utilized, leading to a 
reduction in average speed of passenger and 
freight trains.
2. Organizational structure: Delays in decision-
making, inadequate market orientation 
and long project approval durations lead 
to slow turnover times and delays in the 
implementation of railways projects.
3. Internal generation of resources: Negligible 
non-fare revenues and high freight tariffs have 
led to a sub-optimal freight share. The lower 
relative cost of transporting freight by road has 
led to a decline in the share of the railways. 
Low and static prices for the passenger segment 
have also contributed to low internal generation 
of resources.
4. Safety and poor quality of service 
delivery: There have been a number of 
accidents and safety issues in the IR in recent 
years. Poor cleanliness of trains and stations, 
delays in train departures/arrivals, quality of 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53,596
65,806
Route km
1950-51
2013-14
23%
66,517
11,58,742
Passenger km (million)
1950-51
2013-14
1642%
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
72
food and difficulties in booking tickets are 
key issues. 
5. Efficiency of terminals: Poor terminal facilities 
lengthen loading and unloading times. Eighty 
per cent of railway loads come from terminals. 
The functioning of terminals needs to be 
strengthened to improve rail freight.
6. Economies of scale: The lack of scale 
economies especially impact management 
quality and system accountability.
Way Forward
1. Better utilization of existing infrastructure to 
address congestion:
• Prioritize ongoing projects to improve capacity 
utilization. Timely completion of these projects 
will generate more revenue. At the same time, 
we need to maintain and upgrade the existing 
network to ensure that supply keeps up with 
demand.
• Ensure that the dedicated freight corridors 
(DFCs) and the Mumbai-Ahmedabad High 
Speed Rail (MAHSR) are completed on 
schedule, particularly by timely completion 
of land acquisition for DFCs. DFCs should 
be fully commissioned by FY20; feeder 
routes to the DFCs should be developed 
simultaneously.
2. Ease organizational rigidity through 
structural reforms:
• Consider opening up the ownership and 
operations of freight terminals and ownership 
of locomotives and rolling stock to the private 
sector under a transparent, neutral (non-
railway) and fair regulatory mechanism. This 
will improve performance and attract private 
players and investments.
• Consider transferring coach and locomotive 
manufacturing and repairs to private players. 
However, since human safety is involved in the 
case of coaches and wagons, IR should continue 
to have regulatory and technical control over their 
manufacture and maintenance to ensure the safety 
of users in compliance with the General Rules of IR. 
• Separate suburban passenger transport from 
the rest of the network and put a light rail 
network in place in all major urban areas under 
local governments.
3. Rationalize fare structures and subsidies, 
and monetize assets to generate revenues:
• Revisit IR’s pricing model to make the 
passenger and freight segments sustainable. 
Freight tariffs should be competitive with the 
cost of road transportation. 
• Expedite the process of establishing the 
Rail Development Authority (RDA), already 
approved by the government
19. DA must advise/
make informed decisions on an integrated, 
transparent and dynamic pricing mechanism 
to determine rail fares and rebalance the 
passenger and freight categories to improve 
efficiency and rebalance the modal mix of 
goods transport. 
• Monetize land resources with the railways, 
particularly through developing non-railway 
revenues such as through retail or other activities.
• Increase retail revenues from railway stations by 
investing in facilities, modernizing stations and 
contracting space to private players.
4. Enhance safety of trains to reduce accidents 
and modernize stations:
• The government has created the 
Rashtriya Rail 
Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) in 2017-18 to address 
critical safety related issues.
73
• Eliminate level crossings and cattle crossings 
and fence railway tracks in areas with high 
levels of activity to prevent accidents.
• Increase the use of proven, advanced technol-
ogies such as automatic train protection, fog 
safety devices, end of train telemetry devices and 
on-board/online condition monitoring systems.
• Implement the 22 recommendations of the 
High-Level Safety Review Committee chaired by 
Dr. Kakodkar.
20
• Upgrade and ensure the smooth functioning of 
by-pass crossings and grade separations.
• Redevelop 100 out of 400 identified railway 
stations by 2022. 
• Award station-cleaning contracts to private 
vendors and sharply increase the number of 
bio-toilets by 2019.
5. Enhance the ease of doing business:
• Set up an independent homologation and 
standardization agency to adopt new railway 
technology and improve the speed and 
reliability of the railway network.
• Switch to common transport documents with 
(i) an internationally accepted liability regime 
for domestic and international transportation 
and (ii) common carrier status to all rail-based 
service providers. 
• To enhance credibility, ensure that there are no 
interim changes in tariff and non-tariff rules.  
• Use technology to schedule and route freight busi-
ness to improve asset productivity and utilization.
• Complete by 2022-23 the commissioning of the 
remaining 55 of the 100 new freight terminals 
announced in the Rail Budget of 2016-17 under 
‘Mission Hundred’.
21 
• Improve terminal efficiency by promoting the 
concept of ‘engine-on-load’ system, developing 
proper terminal layouts, adopting efficient 
operational practices, operating trains end-
to-end, and using proper handling methods/
systems for loading and unloading operations.
22 
6. Set up an independent regulator for the 
Indian Railways:
• The government has already approved the 
formation of the RDA, an independent regulator 
for IR in February, 2018. The regulator’s 
functions will include the following:
23 
o Take decisions regarding price regulation 
and enhancement of non-fare revenue.
o Protect consumer interests, promote 
competition, efficiency and economy and 
ensure a fair deal to stakeholders and 
customers.
o Help attract investment, promote efficient 
resource allocation, benchmark service 
standards and enforce standards.
o Put in place measures to absorb new 
technologies and develop human 
resources.
o Provide a framework for non-discriminatory 
open access to the dedicated freight. 
corridors
________________________________________
1 Indian Railways, July 2017. “Reform, Perform and Transform.” 
 http://www.indianrailways.gov.in/Reform-Perform-Transform%202022_v10%20(2).pdf. Accessed April 30, 2018.
2 Budget Speech 2018-19.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
74
3 Rail Budget Speech 2016-17.
 https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/a-multitrack-approach-to-railway-reform/article9937255.ece. Accessed April 30, 
2018.
4 http://indianexpress.com/article/india/only-73-accidents-in-2017-18-first-time-in-35-years-fewer-than-100-railway-acci-
dents-5119024/. Accessed April 25, 2018.
5 India: Three-year Action Agenda 2017-18 to 2019-20 by NITI Aayog http://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/coop/India_ActionAgenda.
pdf. Accessed April 25, 2018.
6 http://www.indianrailways.gov.in/Reform-Perform-Transform%202022_v10%20(2).pdf. Accessed April 26, 2018.
7 Ibid.
8 Ibid.
9 Indian Railways http://www.indianrailways.gov.in/railwayboard/uploads/directorate/stat_econ/MTHSTAT/2017/Freight_March_2017.
pdf. Accessed April 26, 2018.
10 Ministry of Railways.
11 Ibid.
12 Report on Railways by IBEF , September 2017 https://www.ibef.org/download/Railways-September-2017.pdf. Accessed April 27, 
2018.
13 Ibid.
14 India: Three Year Action Agenda 2017-18 to 2019-20 by NITI Aayog http://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/coop/India_ActionAgenda.
pdf. Accessed April 28, 2018.
15 http://pib.nic.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=1514320. Accessed April 28, 2018.
16 ‘Indian Railways: Lifeline of the nation (A White Paper)’ February 2015 http://www.indianrailways.gov.in/railwayboard/uploads/direc-
torate/finance_budget/Budget_2015-16/White_Paper-_English.pdf. Accessed April 30, 2018.
17 ‘Indian Railways: Lifeline of the nation (A White Paper)’ February 2015 http://www.indianrailways.gov.in/railwayboard/uploads/direc-
torate/finance_budget/Budget_2015-16/White_Paper-_English.pdf. Accessed April 30, 2018.
18 Ministry of Railways.
19 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=176324. Accessed April 28, 2018.
20 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=175038. Accessed April 29, 2018.
21 Ibid.
22 ‘Terminals on Indian Railways’ by S. B. Ghosh Dastidar, The Asian Journal (2009), http://www.aitd.net.in/pdf/AsianJournals/24%20
-%20Rail%20Terminal%20Facilities.pdf. Accessed April 30, 2018.
23 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=176324. Accessed May 10, 2018.
75
Objectives
• Enhance the affordability of flying to enable an 
increase in domestic ticket sales from 103.75 
million in 2016-171  to 300 million by 2022.2 
• Double air cargo handled from about 3.3 million 
tonnes in 2017-18 to about 6.5 million tonnes.
• Expand the maintenance, repair and overhaul 
(MRO) industry from USD 1.8 billion in 2017 to 
USD 2.3 billion.
• Expand airport capacity more than five times to 
handle one billion trips a year.
• Enhance availability and affordability of 
regional air connectivity and revive/upgrade 56 
unserved airports and 31 unserved helipads 
through the Regional Connectivity Scheme – 
Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik (RCS-UDAN).
• Ensure that airport tariffs, taxes on fuel, landing 
charges, passenger services, cargo and other 
charges are determined in an efficient, fair and 
transparent manner.
Current Situation
The civil aviation sector contributed USD8.9 billion 
to India’s GDP in 2014 and supported 1.31 million 
direct, indirect and induced aviation jobs.3  In 2016, 
the demand for domestic air travel was twice that in 
China.
4  India’s domestic air traffic made up 69 per 
cent of total airline traffic in South Asia.5 The World 
Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, 
15. Civil Aviation
Figure 15.1: Passenger traffic by scheduled carriers, 2007-08 to 2016-17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71.6 68.4 77.4 
88.9 
98.9 97.9 103.7 
115.8 
134.9 
158.4 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Number of Passengers (Million) 
International Passengers Domestic Passengers Total Passengers
Source: Hand Book on Civil Aviation Statistics 2016-17
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
76
2018 ranks India as 53rd out of 140 countries 
worldwide in air transport infrastructure.
The Airport Authority of India (AAI) aims to bring 
around 250 airports under operation across the 
country by 2020.6  The Ministry of Civil Aviation’s 
regional connectivity scheme, UDAN, is a 10-year 
scheme, which will promote balanced regional 
growth and make flying affordable for the 
population. It will help enhance connectivity to the 
country’s unserved and underserved airports.
India’s civil aviation sector has been growing 
steadily; the number of passengers was 158 million 
in 2016-17.7  Domestic passenger traffic increased 
at a CAGR of almost 10 per cent between 2007-
08 and 2016-17 and international passenger 
traffic grew at a CAGR of 8.07 per cent during the 
same period.8  Between 2014-15 and 2016-17 in 
particular, traffic growth in the domestic passenger 
segment was 48 per cent and 20 per cent in the 
international segment.9  India is also catching up 
with other leading aviation markets in terms of 
market penetration.
There has been an increase in air cargo, both 
domestically and internationally, in 2016-17. IATA 
has forecast that India will cross over into the top 
10 air freight markets in 2018-19.
Constraints
• Capacity and infrastructure: Due to the 
rapid expansion of India’s civil aviation sector, 
airspace, parking bays and runway slots will 
become increasingly scarce over the next few 
years, especially at metro airports. Mumbai and 
Chennai airports are already close to saturation. 
Capacity and infrastructure constraints could 
decrease efficiency and safety and have 
Figure 15.2: Freight transported by air, 2007-08 to 2016-17
 
0.57 0.55 0.69
0.86 0.81 0.78 0.84
0.99 1.05 1.121.15 1.15 1.27
1.50 1.49 1.41 1.44 1.54 1.66
1.861.71 1.70
1.96
2.36 2.30 2.19 2.28
2.53
2.70
2.98
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Frieght Transported by Air (Million MT)
Domestic International Total
Source: Ministry of Civil Aviation
77
negative economic effects. Inadequate hangar 
space and unavailability of land to expand 
airports at their current sites, particularly in 
major cities, are two of the major constraints 
that face the sector. While this may be less 
binding in metro cities where the number of 
passengers is large enough to support more 
than one airport, building more than one airport 
is not feasible in non-metro cities because of 
low passenger volume.
• Skilled workers: According to a study 
conducted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
Indian aviation could directly support 1.0 to 1.2 
million jobs by 2035. This implies that about 
0.25 million persons will need to be skilled over 
the next 10 years. 
o Shortage and gaps in availability of indus-
try-recognised skills – from airline pilots 
and crew to maintenance and ground 
handling personnel – could constrain the 
growth of different segments of the sector.
o Aviation Gasoline (AvGas) is used as fuel 
by almost all training aircraft. This fuel is 
imported, its supply is not assured and it 
attracts a tax of 18 per cent (earlier 28 per 
cent) under GST . Coupled with a shortage 
of instructors, this makes flying training an 
expensive and time-consuming exercise. 
• High cost to passengers and of air cargo: 
o Tariff determination: The Ministry of 
Civil Aviation has mandated that all 
airports move from a single to a hybrid till 
structure. Although this is beneficial as it 
incentivizes infrastructure investment, it 
raises costs for airlines and passengers. 
o Taxes on aviation turbine fuel (ATF): 
Due to high taxes and lack of competition 
among providers, ATF is relatively 
expensive in India. Since it remains outside 
the GST network, there are also regional 
disparities in its price. The price of aviation 
fuel in India may be up to 60 per cent per 
cent higher than prices in ASEAN and the 
Middle East countries because of high 
central and state taxes.
10 Fuel cost as a 
percentage of operating charges amounts 
to 45 per cent
11 in India as compared to 
the global average of 30 per cent. 
o Incidence of GST on Aircraft Leases and 
Spare Parts: GST of 5 per cent is applied on 
aircraft lease rentals; GST ranges between 
5 per cent and 28 per cent on aircraft 
engines and spare parts. This also raises 
costs for the sector.
• Aviation safety: Although, the number of 
aviation safety violations in 2017 (337) has 
declined in comparison to 2016 (442), the 
absolute number still remains high.
Way Forward
1. Enhance aviation infrastructure
• Complete the planned airports under the UDAN 
initiative in a time-bound manner. Revival of 50 
un-served and under-served airports/airstrips 
should be completed.
• In addition to completing two new airports for 
Delhi and Mumbai by 2022, the infrastructure 
capacity in the 10 biggest airports (in terms of 
traffic) should be significantly augmented.
• Include provisions for domestic hub 
development while auctioning traffic rights.
2. Increase investment in the sector through 
financial and infrastructure support
• Reduce taxes on MRO services and consider 
granting infrastructure status for MRO.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
78
• Increase aircraft parking infrastructure and 
facilities at metro airports.
• Create additional parking hubs at suitable 
locations, accessible through short haul flights, 
to accommodate additional aircraft.
• Monetize vacant real estate near AAI airports 
in all major centres of traffic to increase non-
aeronautical revenues.
3. Address shortage of skilled manpower
• Promote collaboration between original 
equipment manufacturers (OEMs), industry 
and educational institutes to teach the latest 
concepts in the aviation industry including 
management principles, IT in aviation, etc.
• Formulate long-term plans for advanced 
research in aviation technologies to create a 
manufacturing ecosystem in the country.
• Expedite commencement of courses by 
the National Aviation University after due 
consultation with stakeholders.
• Facilitate greater involvement of the private 
sector in sponsoring aviation institutions, 
industrial training and R&D projects.  
• A further reduction in GST rates on Avgas will 
allow flying training organizations to make 
training more affordable.
4. Promote air cargo growth 
• Promote “Fly-from-India” through the creation 
of transhipment hubs. The transhipment hub in 
Delhi is scheduled to be launched in May 2018 
followed by the launch of those in Chennai and 
Mumbai.
• Develop an integrated digital supply chain or 
e-cargo gateway based on the National Air 
Cargo Community System (NACCS) platform. 
The modular development may include the 
following digital business enablers as plug-ins:
• e-contracting/booking of cargo – with access to 
financial payment gateways. 
• e-transportation multimodality (road-air first/last 
mile connectivity).
• e-compliances (initially online clearances by six 
participating governmental agencies; rest to 
follow).
• Cargo Sewa – a grievance redressal module 
linked to Air Sewa.
5. Ease the regulatory environment for airports 
• Deregulate further and open up the aviation 
market to help increase passenger and freight 
traffic in India.
• Adopt a consistent model for tariff 
determination so that it reduces passenger cost. 
• Align taxation and pricing structure to global 
benchmarks by considering bringing aviation 
turbine fuel (ATF) under the rubric of GST .
• Amend the AAI Act to allow commercial usage 
of land with airports by liberalising end-use 
restrictions for existing and future airports.
• Strengthen regulatory capacity with respect 
to public private partnerships and streamline 
the judicial review process to ensure timely 
implementation of DGCA ’s decisions.
• Ensure that the DGCA acts as a truly 
independent regulator, with the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation focusing on policies.
• Meet the regulatory and security 
requirements prescribed by the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) at all 
times. Additional skilling of personnel may 
be required for this and the DGCA should 
79
adequately build the capabilities of its staff to 
ensure compliance.
6. Prioritize aviation safety12 
• Shift focus to pre-empting and preventing 
accidents/incidents.
• There should be zero tolerance of safety 
violations.
• DGCA should be given autonomy for an 
effective aviation safety oversight system. 
It should also be authorized to impose fines 
and penalties depending upon the nature of 
violations.
• DGCA should continue ensuring real time safety 
tracking and prompt incident reporting.
• DGCA should create a single-window system 
for all aviation related transactions, queries and 
complaints.
________________________________________
1 Hand Book on Civil Aviation Statistics 2016-17’ http://dgca.nic.in/pub/Handbook_2016-17.pdf. Accessed April 25, 2018.
2 National Civil Aviation Policy 2016   
http://www.civilaviation.gov.in/sites/default/files/Final_NCAP_2016_15-06-2016-2_1.pdf. Accessed April 25, 2018.
3 IATA and Oxford Economics, “The Importance of Air Travel to India”.  
http://www.iata.org/publications/economics/Reports/voa-country-reports/2016/ap-india-2017.pdf. Accessed April 25, 2018.
4 Invest India, Aviation Sector Overview https://www.investindia.gov.in/sector/aviation. Accessed April 25, 2018.
5 Ibid.
6 https://www.ibef.org/download/Aviation_Report_Feb_20183.pdf. Accessed April 26, 2018.
7 ‘Hand Book on Civil Aviation Statistics 2016-17’ http://dgca.nic.in/pub/Handbook_2016-17.pdf. Accessed April 26, 2018.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
10 “ Aviation Sector: Status Check and Roadmap.” Accessed April 27, 2018.  
http://www.advayalegal.com/articles/article-october,-2014-(edition-of-infrastructure-today-magazine).pdf.
11 Hindu Business Line, April 14, 2014. “Indian Aviation grounded by High Taxes.” Accessed April 27, 2018.  
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/India-aviation-grounded-by-high-taxes-IATA-chief/article20727740.ece.
12 National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. Ministry of Civil Aviation. Accessed April 27, 2018.
 http://www.civilaviation.gov.in/sites/default/files/Final_NCAP_2016_15-06-2016-2_1.pdf.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
80
Objectives
• Double the share of freight transported by 
coastal shipping and inland waterways from 6 
per cent in 2016-171 to 12 per cent by 2025.
• Increase the port handling capacity to 2,500 
million metric tonnes (MMT)2 by 2022-23.
• Reduce the turnaround time at major ports from 
about 3.44 days (2016-17)
3 to 1-2 days (global 
average) by 2022-23.
• Increase the throughput of inland waterways 
from 55.20 MMT in 2016-17 to 60-70 MMT by 
2022-23.
• Augment the capacity of inland water transport 
by increasing the least available depth.
Current Situation
1. Ports and shipping
India has a coastline spanning about 7,500 km, 
forming one of the biggest peninsulas in the world. 
Around 90 per cent of India’s external trade by 
volume and 70 per cent by value are handled by 
ports.
4 Twelve major ports and 205 non-major ports 
operate on India’s coast. Yet, roads and railways 
continue to be the dominant mode for cargo 
movement. Despite being the most cost-effective 
(Figure 16.1) and efficient mode, water transport 
accounted for 6 per cent of freight transport in India 
in 2016-17.
The total cargo handling capacity at major and non-
major ports stands at 2161.85 MMT
5  as on March 
3l, 2017. Total capacity utilization across all ports 
was 52.44 per cent. During 2016-17, the total cargo 
throughput through major and non-major ports was 
1133.69 MMT .
The Ministry of Shipping’s Sagarmala programme 
focuses on modernizing and developing ports, 
enhancing port connectivity, supporting coastal 
communities and stimulating port-linked 
industrialization (Figure 16.2). Sagarmala aims 
to reduce the logistics costs for foreign and 
domestic trade, leading to an overall cost savings 
of INR 35,000 to INR 40,000 crore annually by 
2025. It also aims to double the share of water 
transportation in the modal mix.
The government has set up the 
Sagarmala 
Development Company Limited (SDCL) to provide 
funding support to special purpose vehicles (SPVs) 
set up to implement projects and the Indian Port 
Rail Corporation Limited (IPRCL) to undertake port-
rail connectivity projects under Sagarmala.
2. Inland waterways
Inland Water Transport (IWT) carries less than 2 
per cent of India’s organized freight traffic and 
negligible passenger traffic. The annual freight 
volumes carried on inland waterways using 
National Waterways (NW-1, NW-2, and NW-3) 
and Goa Waterways was 21.91 MMT in 2016-
17. Additionally, Maharashtra Waterways alone 
transported more than 33.29 MMT .
16. Ports, Shipping and Inland 
Waterways

81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.5 
0.3 
0.15 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Road Rail Waterways Pipelines
Rs./Tonne Km 
Figure 16.1: Operating cost comparison in transporting cargo through  
various modes
Source: Sagarmala National Perspective Plan, 2016
 
 
 
2. Inland Waterways 
 
Inland Water Transport (IWT) carries less than 2 per cent of India's organized freight traffic and negligible 
passenger traffic. The annual freight volumes carried on inland waterways using National Waterways 
(NW-1, NW-2, and NW -3) and Goa Waterways was 21.91 MMT in 2016 -17. Additionally, Maharashtra 
Waterways alone transported more than 33.29 MMT. 
 
The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is mandated to develop and maintain  infrastructure for 
fairway, navigational aids and terminals. The IWAI also provides an enabling environment for private 
investment in cargo vessels and operational services. Until 2015, there were only five NWs in the country. 
In April20l6, 106 more waterways spread over 24 states were declared as NWs. The ministry is 
augmenting the capacity of NW-l under the Jal Marg Vikas project. The project will enable the movement 
of larger vessels of  1,500-2,000 tonnes on inland waterways . The government is also proposing to fund 
NWs through the Central Road Fund (CRF). The Ministry of Finance has amended the Central Road Fund 
Act, 2000 , as part of the Finance Bill 2018 to include a list of projects and infrastructure sub -sectors, 
including inland waterways, for which the CRF could be used . The CRF has since been renamed the 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund.  
 
CONSTRAINTS 
 
1. Unfavourable Modal Mix:  Roads (54 per cent) continue to be the dominant mode of transporting 
cargo, followed by rail (33 per cent). Transportation of cargo through waterways – shipping and inland 
water – accounts for a minuscule modal share (6 per cent) despite it being the most cost-effective and 
efficient mode. 
2. Inadequate draught levels:  Most Indian container handling ports lack the capability to handle large 
container vessels due to inadequate depth ; a minimum draft depth of 18 metres is needed to enable 
mother vessels to dock at ports. With international trade leaning towards the more economically viable 
mother vessels, shallow draft adversely affects a port’s potential to become a hub port. 
3. Lack of adequate connectivity to ports:  Weak hinterland connectivity between production centres 
and gateway ports often leads to higher costs and delays because of sub-optimal mode choices. 
Port Modernization 
• Capacity 
augmentation 
• New ports 
• Efficiency 
improvement 
Port Connectivity 
• New road/rail 
connectivity 
• Up-gradation of 
roads/railway 
• Coastal shipping 
• Inland water 
transport 
• Logistics parks 
Port-led 
Industrialization 
• Industrial clusters 
• Coastal Economic 
Zones 
• Maritime clusters 
Coastal 
Community 
Development 
• Skill develoment 
• Coastal tourism 
projects 
• Devlopment of 
fishing harbours, fish 
processing centres 
Figure 16.2: Pillars of the Sagarmala programme
Port-led Development
Source: Ministry of Shipping
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
82
The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is 
mandated to develop and maintain infrastructure 
for fairway, navigational aids and terminals. The 
IWAI also provides an enabling environment for 
private investment in cargo vessels and operational 
services. Until 2015, there were only five NWs in 
the country. In April 2016, 106 more waterways 
spread over 24 states were declared as NWs. The 
ministry is augmenting the capacity of NW-l under 
the Jal Marg Vikas project. The project will enable 
the movement of larger vessels of 1,500-2,000 
tonnes on inland waterways. The government is 
also proposing to fund NWs through the Central 
Road Fund (CRF). The Ministry of Finance has 
amended the Central Road Fund Act, 2000, as part 
of the Finance Bill 2018 to include a list of projects 
and infrastructure sub-sectors, including inland 
waterways, for which the CRF could be used. The 
CRF has since been renamed the Central Road and 
Infrastructure Fund. 
Constraints
1. Modal mix: Roads (54 per cent) continue to 
be the dominant mode of transporting cargo, 
followed by rail (33 per cent). Transportation of 
cargo through waterways – shipping and inland 
water – accounts for a minuscule modal share 
(6 per cent) despite it being the most cost-
effective and efficient mode.
2. Draught levels: Most Indian container 
handling ports lack the capability to handle 
large container vessels due to inadequate 
depth; a minimum draft depth of 18 metres 
is needed to enable mother vessels to dock 
at ports. With international trade leaning 
towards the more economically viable mother 
vessels, shallow draft adversely affects a port’s 
potential to become a hub port.
3. Connectivity to ports: Weak hinterland 
connectivity between production centres and 
gateway ports often leads to higher costs and 
delays because of sub-optimal mode choices.
4. Transhipment port: A large percentage of 
containers in India are currently transhipped 
through other ports, such as Colombo (just 
south of India), Singapore (East), Dubai 
and Salalah (West) due to the absence of a 
transhipment port in the country. This has led 
to additional costs and delays due to the feeder 
voyage from India to the hub port.
5. Charges by the shipping lines: The business 
practices of shipping lines have played a key 
role in the present negative perception of sea 
transport. A long pending concern has been the 
high rate and multiplicity of charges imposed by 
shipping lines. 
6. Capital for inland vessels: At present, the cost 
of capital is very high and makes IWT freight 
uncompetitive. It is difficult to attract capital 
for building inland vessels as it is a significant 
investment.
7. Technical issues in inland waterways: 
The varying and limited depths due to the 
meandering and braiding of alluvial rivers and 
the erosion of their banks causing excessive 
siltation, lack of cargo earmarked for IWT , 
non-mechanized navigation lock systems and 
insufficient unloading facility at terminals hinder 
the use of IWT by shippers.
8. Regulatory issues for inland waterways: 
States’ Ferries Acts from various years 
govern cross ferry movement and this may 
present a barrier to inland navigation, as the 
regulations may not take into account safety 
considerations.
83
Way Forward
1. Open up India’s dredging market
• The government needs to open up the 
dredging market to attract more players, 
particularly international players, in dredging 
activities to increase and maintain draft depth 
at ports to attract large vessels and enable 
them to become hub ports. At present, the 
Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) and 
a limited set of private vendors serve the 
Indian dredging market, limiting competition. 
Foreign players will be attracted to the market 
if the government takes measures such as 
consolidating dredging contracts across cohorts 
of ports and withdrawing, at least temporarily, 
the right to first refusal given to Indian vendors.  
• To enable major ports to handle larger vessels, 
an action plan to increase the draft depth of 
ports has been prepared. Most major ports have 
already achieved a draft of 14 metres or more 
except Kolkata Port, where deeper draft has 
not been feasible because of the riverine nature 
of the port. Some major ports are striving to 
achieve deeper drafts up to18 metres. The outer 
harbour in Visakhapatnam has very deep draft 
of more than 18 metres. Work is in progress 
to create a draft of more than 18 metres in 
Mormugao and Kamarajar Port.
2. Expedite the implementation of 
Sagarmala
• Expedite the completion of various projects under 
Sagarmala, especially those aimed at improving 
port connectivity, setting up coastal economic 
zones (CEZs) and establishing new ports.
• The setting up of a single window facility 
for cargo clearance and putting in place fully 
mechanized cargo handling infrastructure will 
be critical to increase throughput. 
3. Ease the business environment around 
shipping and ports
• The Government of India needs to take a fresh 
look at its policy of imports on a ‘’Free on 
Board” basis (FoB policy) as it needs to balance 
risk between the importer and exporter.
• Enhance technology use in ports and, wherever 
feasible, draw lessons from successful global 
ports such as Rotterdam, Felixstowe and 
Singapore to improve efficiency.
4. Transhipment ports and shipping lines
• Transhipment via Cochin ICCT (already 
commissioned), the upcoming Vizhinjam Port 
and the Enayam Port at Colachel will create a 
transhipment cluster similar to the clusters in 
Malaysian and Singaporean ports. The cluster 
should be completed within the targeted 
timelines and a business plan should be drawn 
up to make it a success.
• The new Merchant Shipping Bill to replace the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, needs to be enacted 
at the earliest to promote the ease of doing 
business, transparency and effective delivery of 
services. Opening up of the sector will improve the 
availability of ships and help reduce costs. 
5. Enhance last mile connectivity to inland 
waterways
• IWT should be integrated to multimodal/
intermodal connectivity. Inland terminals 
with proper road and/or rail connectivity and 
seamless transfer of goods from one mode to 
the other are important for an efficient logistics 
supply chain. 
• Procure floating terminals and cranes and 
place them suitably so that access to roads is 
possible.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
84
•  Enhance linkages between national waterways 
and state waterways and feeder canals.
6. Facilitate access to capital for inland vessels
• Financing for inland vessels could be made part 
of priority sector lending by banks.
• Categorizing inland vessels as infrastructure 
equipment will further ease access to capital 
issues for a sector where capital investments 
and operational costs are high.
• Initially, viability gap funding needs to be given 
at least for 10 years until the infrastructure is 
fully developed, so that inland water transport 
is competitive.
• We should consider waiving waterway charges 
and lock charges until operable infrastructure is 
made available.
• Revive the shipbuilding finance scheme in line 
with the subsidy scheme that was in force 
during 2002-2007, which led to high growth 
rates in the shipping sector and full order books 
for Indian shipyards.
7. Address technical and regulatory constraints 
in inland waterways to ease movement of 
inland vessels
• CCEA, chaired by the Hon’ble Prime Minister 
approved the implementation of the 
Jal Marg 
Vikas project (JMVP) to augment the capacity 
of National Waterway-1 (NW-1) with technical 
assistance and investment support from the 
World Bank at a cost of INR 5369.18 crore.  
We must ensure that the project is completed 
by March 2023.
6 
• From a regulatory standpoint, detention of a 
vessel without a valid reason should not be 
allowed.
• A clear directive needs to be issued for security 
of inland vessels, crew and cargo.
• Strengthen existing Inland Water Transport 
Directorates or Maritime Boards or set them up 
in states where they do not exist to ease the 
IWT business and to ensure efficient regulation 
and facilitation of IWT for cargo movement.  
________________________________________
1 Financial Express, September 19, 2016. Accessed May 8, 2018.
 https://www.financialexpress.com/economy/narendra-modi-govt-does-well-with-its-inland-waterway-move-but-infrastructure-is-a-
challenge/381439/.
2 In 2016, the government announced that INR 1 lakh crore would be dedicated to increasing India’s port handling capacity to 3,000 
MMT by 2025.
3 Press Information Bureau, Government of India. April 12, 2017. “Major Ports Register 6.79 per cent Growth in Traffic over last year, 
Outperform Private Ports for Second Consecutive Year.” Accessed May 8, 2018.
 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=160949.
4 Press Information Bureau, Government of India. December 20, 2017. “Ministry of Shipping – 2017 Consolidation.” Accessed May 8, 
2018.
 http://pib.nic.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1513281.
5 Port capacity of major ports rerated on berthing policy as per international norms.
6 Press Information Bureau, Government of India. January 3, 2018. “Cabinet approves Jal Marg Vikas Project for enhanced navigation 
on the Haldia-Varanasi stretch of National Waterway-1.” Accessed May 8, 2018.
 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=175208.
85
Objectives
• Achieve multi-modal movement of cargo on 
par with global logistics standards.
• Reduce the logistics cost to less than 10 per 
cent of GDP from the current level of 14 per 
cent.
• Expand the logistics market to USD215 
billion by 2020 from the current level of 
USD160 billion.
1 
• Improve logistics skilling and increase jobs 
in the sector to 40 million by 2022-23 from 
about 22 million in 2016.
• As per the approved National Trade 
Facilitation Action Plan, reduce border 
compliance time to 24 hours for exports and 
to 48 hours for imports by 2020.
Current Situation
The Indian logistics industry employs more than 
22 million people (as of 2016). Between 2011-12 
and 2015-16, the logistics sector’s value has grown 
at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 7.8 
per cent. However, existing logistics costs in India 
are high relative to other countries. Logistics costs 
have been estimated at 14 per cent of India’s GDP 
relative to 9 per cent of GDP in the United States, 
11 per cent in Japan, 12 per cent in Korea and 
14.9 per cent in China.
2  A 10 per cent decrease in 
indirect logistics cost has the potential to increase 
exports by 5-8 per cent.3 
Recognizing its importance for exports and growth, 
the government has included logistics in the harmo-
nized master list of the infrastructure subsector. This 
will ease access to credit and simplify the approvals 
process for building infrastructure in the sector. 
The government has also created a new Logistics 
Division in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
that will focus on the integrated development of the 
logistics sector, improving procedures and introduc-
ing new technologies.
Infrastructure or transport quality is a particular area 
of concern for the logistics sector. About 35 per cent 
of export-import cargo originates in or is destined 
for hinterland locations. The World Economic 
Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) ranked 
India 66th out of 137 countries in infrastructure in 
2017-18. The World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business 
ranks India 146 out of 190 countries in ‘trading 
across borders’. India ranks lower than China (96), 
Vietnam (93), Sri Lanka (90) and Indonesia (108).
Constraints
1. Cost of logistics: The cost of logistics 
remains high due to challenges in accessing 
finance, underdeveloped infrastructure, poor 
connectivity and an unfavourable modal mix.
2. Coordination due to multiple stakeholders’ 
involvement: Logistics has four key 
components that account for the majority of 
the sector: transport, warehousing, freight 
forwarding and value added logistics. Each 
of these falls under different segments of 
regulatory oversight, which adds complexity to 
the system. The presence of multiple agencies 
often leads to duplicate processes. Further, 
17. Logistics
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
86
non-uniform documentation across states 
adds to transaction costs. While the recently 
implemented Goods and Services Tax (GST) has 
simplified documentation requirements across 
states to some extent, there still remains further 
room for improvement. Countries with multiple 
agencies in logistics have reduced efficiency, 
coordination and competitiveness.4 
3. Warehousing capacity and fragmented 
structure: India’s current reported warehousing 
capacity is 108.75 million metric tonnes (MMT) 
of which the private sector makes up less than 
20 per cent. There is low value addition in the 
warehouse sector. Handling and warehousing 
facilities are still largely un-mechanized with 
manual loading, unloading and handling in the 
case of many commodities.
4. Seamless movement of goods across modes 
and high dwell time: In addition to lack of 
interoperable technology, the movement of 
goods across modes suffers from the absence 
of last mile connectivity and infrastructure. For 
example, poor road and rail connectivity to 
most non-major ports leads to delays in travel 
time. The share of cargo moving through coastal 
shipping is small, primarily due to the lack of 
infrastructure and connectivity for feeder ships 
that operate between smaller container ports.
5. Competition and underutilized capacity: 
There is no level playing field as the public sector 
is provided benefits that are not available to 
private players such as container train operators 
or foreign vessel owners, leading to limited 
competition, capacity underutilization and other 
inefficiencies.
6. Interoperable technology across modes: 
The lack of interoperability of software systems 
used by the authorities governing different 
modes of transport leads to inefficiencies as it 
increases transit time and the need for manual 
intervention when switching modes. 
7. Border compliance and document 
processing time: India’s average border 
compliance time (including customs regulations 
and mandatory inspections) for exports 
is 106 hours and for imports 264 hours. 
India’s document processing time (including 
documentary compliance for various agencies 
including regulators) is an average of 38 hours 
for exports and 61 hours for imports. 
Way Forward
1. Rationalize tariffs and determine prices in 
an efficient manner across different modes: 
Tariff policies need to be rationalized. The 
Railways chapter provides details on rail freight 
while the Civil Aviation chapter highlights 
the need to determine air cargo tariffs in a 
consistent manner across airports. 
2. Create an overarching body that maintains a 
repository of all transport data: Such a body or 
institute will be responsible for acquiring, man-
aging and disseminating data to internal stake-
holders. The proposed institute can also conduct 
robust analysis of the data, which it should make 
publicly available. This body can be a part of the 
logistics portal that is under development.
3. Enhance efficiency of warehouses and their 
operation, especially to optimize food storage:
• 
Create vertical silos for food storage and 
transport food grains by specialized wagons. 
We could operate smaller silos at the mandi 
level connected to mother silos that have 
bulk handling and rail connectivity. Further, 
specialized wagons with top loading and 
bottom discharge functions should be made 
available for handling grains. These measures 
will help reduce food losses.
87
• Optimize existing warehouse space. Existing 
warehouses can be converted into multi-
storeyed ones to store multiple commodities 
at the same time. This will greatly increase 
warehousing space.
4. Increase emphasis on multimodal solutions: 
Setting up multimodal logistics parks will help 
address issues related to underdeveloped 
infrastructure, an unfavourable modal mix 
and connectivity. The government has already 
approved 24 logistics parks under the 
Bharatma-
la programme and seven have been identified 
under the Sagarmala programme. These may be 
completed by 2022-23. They should reflect best 
practices from global logistics parks with respect 
to comprehensive development and synergies 
across modes of transport.
5. Allow private players to operate in CON-
COR and port terminals: There is no level 
playing field for private container train opera-
tors (CTOs) vis-à-vis the Container Corporation 
of India (CONCOR). Providing shared space 
at CONCOR terminals to private CTOs will 
help utilize the infrastructure better. Similarly, 
opening up port terminals to private players at 
a fee will enhance capacity utilization.
6. Increase technology use to enhance 
logistics:
• 
Integrate technologies across modes of trans-
port by developing an integrated information 
technology (IT) platform. Increasing the in-
teroperability of technology across modes by 
implementing container tracking systems, radio 
frequency identification (RFID), etc., will reduce 
delays and enhance efficiency. The integrated 
IT platform should be a single window for all 
logistics related matters. The portal should be 
linked to the IT systems of all transport modes, 
and customs and state transport authorities. It 
should act as a logistics marketplace.
• 
Create an institutional mechanism for 
technology adoption in transport. India needs 
to create an office, similar to the Office of the 
Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology 
(OST-R) in the USA, under the Commerce 
Ministry’s newly created Logistics Division 
to advance the use of innovation, develop 
technology and create a skilled interdisciplinary 
transportation workforce.
7. Shift towards international standards for 
transport equipment and software: To 
increase efficiency and ensure compatibility, we 
should gradually adopt international standards, 
especially in operations, and adopt global 
benchmarking on unit load devices such as 
containers and pallets. While this will require 
changes in the overall infrastructure of ships, 
ports and railways, it will help realize savings in 
cost, time and accounting. Associated handling 
equipment such as forklifts, cranes, tractors, 
scanning and inspection technologies, and 
flatbed rail wagons should be standardized and 
become ubiquitous.
________________________________________
1 Annual Economic Survey 2018-19. Ministry of Finance.
2 National Transport Development Policy Committee (NTDPC). “India Transport Report: Moving India to 2032”, 2014. Data for China 
are from the National Development Reform Commission, 2016.
3 Annual Economic Survey 2018-19. Ministry of Finance.
4 Annual Economic Survey 2017-18.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
88
Objectives
Given the relevance of digital connectivity to 
economic growth and the need to eliminate the 
digital divide by 2022-23, India should aim to 
achieve:
• Physical digital connectivity across all states, 
districts and gram panchayats (GPs).
• Delivery of government services digitally by 
2022-23.
• Hundred per cent basic digital literacy across 
the country to be able to leverage the benefits 
of digitization.
Current Situation
According to the Internet Trends 2017 report,1  27 per 
cent of India’s population (355 million users) uses the 
internet. While this represents exponential growth 
compared to the 4 per cent penetration in 2009 (see 
Figure 18.1 below), there is scope for improvement.  
The Digital India scheme launched in 2015 
brought the topic of digitization to the forefront 
of public discourse. Areas including construction 
of broadband highways, public internet access, 
e-governance and development of basic 
information technology skills, etc., have achieved 
considerable progress under this programme 2.  
18. Digital Connectivity
Figure 18.1: Increase in internet users and online penetration in India
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016E
Online Penetration (%) 
Internet Users (million) 
Source: Internet Trends 2017 by KPCB3
89
In 2011,4  the scheme for the creation of a National 
Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) was initiated to 
connect all the GPs of the country with high-speed 
internet. Although the project has lagged behind 
its original timelines, significant progress has been 
made in the past two years. As of February 4, 
2018,5  under BharatNet, work had started in 1.24 
lakh GPs of which 1.08 lakh GPs were service ready. 
The targeted timeline to connect the remaining 
1,50,000 GPs is March 2019. Furthermore, the 
National Information Infrastructure (NII) will 
ensure the integration of the networks and cloud 
infrastructure to provide high-speed connectivity 
to various government departments up to the 
panchayat level.6 The components of NII include 
networks such as the State Wide Area Network 
(SWAN), National Knowledge Network (NKN), 
BharatNet, Government User Network (GUN) and 
the MeghRaj Cloud.
The government also launched the Public Internet 
Access Programme 7 to make 2,50,000 common 
service centres (CSCs) operational at the gram 
panchayat level to deliver government services 
online. Under this programme, 1,50,000 post 
offices will be converted into multi-service centres. 
The last mile connectivity, through Wi-Fi or any 
other suitable broadband technology, is to be 
provided at all GPs in the country, funded by the 
Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). Since 
the last mile connectivity will be provided by a 
service provider, it will ensure the presence of at 
least one telecommunications service provider 
(TSP)/internet service providers (ISP) at each GP to 
provide data service.
The government has identified 55,619 villages
8  
with no mobile coverage. Most of these villages 
are in the North-Eastern states. A comprehensive 
development plan, to be implemented in phases, 
has been initiated to cover remote villages in the 
North-East. 
Constraints 
With the increasing role of technology in our daily 
lives and the growing significance of Industry 4.0, 
India can only unlock its true potential once digital 
connectivity, the basic building block for most 
technological solutions, reaches the last mile. The 
constraints that need to be addressed to unleash 
the full benefits of digital connectivity in India fall 
under five major areas:
1. Broadband connectivity
• Internet access is plagued by issues related to 
quality and reliability, outages, call drops and 
weak signals. 
• The current definition of broadband of 512 
kbps
9 speed is inadequate and not in line with 
the expected rise in demand in the future.
• Existing networks have been strained by limited 
spectrum availability and usage, affecting the 
provision of quality services.
2. Digital access and literacy
• A significant portion of our population does 
not have access to devices such as laptops, 
computers, smartphones, etc. 
• Digital literacy in India is estimated to be less 
than 10 per cent of the population.
10 
3. Content in Indian languages
• Currently, most digital content is in English. 
However, a KPMG11 report suggested that “9 
out of every 10 new internet users in India over 
the next 5 years are likely to be Indian language 
users”.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
90
4. Availability of e-services
• A large number of e-services are not available 
on the digital platform and there is wide 
variation across states in the availability of 
citizen e-services. Currently, citizens have to 
physically visit government offices to access 
most government-to-citizen (G2C) services, as 
municipalities and other government bodies 
have been slow to digitize their processes.
5. Cyber security
• The regulatory framework for cyber security is 
inadequate.
• Hacking and denial-of-service attacks have 
led to disruption of services, both in the 
government and the private sector – banks 
and governments increasingly face security 
breaches.
Way Forward
Broadband connectivity
• A modified strategy for expediting the pace 
of implementation of the BharatNet project 
was approved on July 19, 2017. As part of the 
modified strategy, the remaining 1.50,000 GPs 
are to be connected in Phase-II through a state-
led model (8 states), private sector model (2 
states) and CPSU model (10 states) by using an 
optimal mix of media (OFC, radio and satellite).  
Further, about 5298 GPs located in remote and 
hilly locations with poor connectivity are being 
connected on satellite media, so as to provide 
broadband connectivity to all GPs. The service 
delivery mechanism, by providing last mile 
connectivity through Wi-Fi or any other suitable 
broadband technology to all GPs, has been 
made an integral part of the project. The project 
is targeted to be implemented by March, 2019. 
In addition, public Wi-Fi hotspots are being set 
up by BSNL at its 25,000 telephone exchanges 
in rural areas and Wi-Fi 
choupals are being set 
up in 5,000 GPs by CSC-SPV under the Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY). 
• The provision of universal broadband 
coverage at 50 Mbps to every citizen and 
the enabling of 100 Mbps broadband on 
demand to all key development institutions, 
including educational institutions, are under 
consideration in the new National Digital 
Communications Policy, 2018. 
• As the sector regulator, TRAI should consider 
putting in place a credible system to track call 
drops, weak signals and outages to ensure 
the quality and reliability of telecom services. 
The results may be put in the public domain. 
Government should also put in place telecom 
ombudsman for complaint redressal.
Quality of service
• Adequate spectrum availability is critical to 
ensure service quality. Efficient spectrum 
allocation in large contiguous blocks should be 
explored. We should also explore migration to 
new technologies which would resolve some of 
the bandwidth challenges. 
Access and digital literacy
• Digital literacy needs special focus at the 
school/college levels. The National Digital 
Literacy Mission should focus on introducing 
digital literacy at the primary school level in 
all government schools for basic content and 
in higher classes and colleges for advanced 
content. The multiplier effects of this mission 
will be realized when these students in turn 
educate their family members. Higher digital 
literacy will also increase the adoption of 
computer hardware across the country.
91
Content in Indian languages
• State governments should pay special attention 
to creating content, particularly those relating 
to government e-services, in Indian regional 
languages. 
 To fulfil the vision of making all government’s 
online services available in all 22 official 
languages, there needs to be focused 
collaboration between the centre, states and 
researchers to promote Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) in Indian languages. Machine 
learning now makes this well within reach. 
Focus could be laid on the automatic translation 
of content into regional languages from Hindi or 
English. Case studies like those of the European 
Union, which had similar problems in making 
content available in the languages of member 
countries, should be explored to identify models 
that can potentially be adopted. 
Availability of e-services
• Individual ministries and states have to play a 
pivotal role in ensuring that all their services 
are available and easily accessible by citizens 
over digital platforms. Digital platforms, that 
enable real-time data updates, would increase 
accountability, and facilitate monitoring, quality 
checks and timely intervention by the higher 
administrative authorities. Procurement of such 
digital platforms could be standardized by the 
central government based on an analysis of 
successful case studies in India. This would 
ensure expedited implementation across the 
country. As mentioned earlier, ministries/states 
should also ensure that the services are reliable, 
safe and available in regional languages as well 
as in Hindi/English. 
Cyber security
• MeitY will need to evolve a comprehensive 
cyber security framework for data security, safe 
digital transactions and complaint redressal. The 
National e-governance Division of MeitY should 
periodically audit compliance of e-services 
offered by state governments. It should bring 
out a performance report of e-services with a 
view to improve service delivery.     
________________________________________
1 http://www.kpcb.com/internet-trends. Accessed May 08, 2018.
2 http://www.kpcb.com/internet-trends. Accessed May 07, 2018.
3 http://www.kpcb.com/internet-trends. Accessed May 07, 2018.
4 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=76838. Accessed May 06, 2018.
5 http://www.bbnl.nic.in/index1.aspx?lsid=570&lev=2&lid=467&langid=1. Accessed May 06, 2018.
6 http://www.digitalindia.gov.in/content/national-information-infrastructure-nii. Accessed May 06, 2018.
7 http://www.digitalindia.gov.in/content/public-internet-access-programme. Accessed May 07, 2018.
8 http://www.digitalindia.gov.in/content/universal-access-mobile-connectivity. Accessed May 07, 2018.
9 http://tec.gov.in/pdf/Studypaper/Study%20paper%20on%20BB%20Definition.pdf. Accessed May 07, 2018.
10 https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/in/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/in-tmt-digital-india-un-
lock-opportunity-noexp.pdf. Accessed May 09, 2018.
11 https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/in/pdf/2017/04/Indian-languages-Defining-Indias-Internet.pdf. Accessed May 02, 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
92
Objectives
Leverage the ‘Smart Cities’ concept in select urban 
clusters to:
• Drive job creation and economic growth.
•  Significantly improve efficiencies in service 
delivery. 
•  Leverage technology for inclusive, sustainable 
and participatory development by 2022-23.
Current Situation
Smart Cities is an approach to urban development 
characterized by area-based development, efficient 
delivery of basic infrastructure and services in an 
equitable manner and citizens’ participation. 
The Government of India has so far selected 99 
cities with an outlay of INR 2.04 lakh crore. These 
cities have started implementing projects such as 
smart command and control centres, smart area-
based development, smart roads, solar rooftops, 
intelligent transport systems and smart parks. These 
projects have the unique feature of integration 
between different infrastructural elements of the 
projects. As of 14 May 2018, projects worth INR 
4,800 crores have been completed and works worth 
more than INR 20,000 crores are underway, as per 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs’ Smart 
City MIS portal.
Constraints
The key operational challenge areas in the Smart 
City Mission include the non-availability of the 
following: 
• An institutional mechanism for inter-agency 
coordination, including special purpose vehicles 
(SPVs), for effective delivery.
• A robust spatial plan as an overall framework 
within which smart city planning and 
implementation can happen. 
• Smart mechanisms to enhance the voices of the 
urban poor, slum dwellers, migrants and other 
underprivileged citizens.  
• A digital master plan or a digital strategy and 
roadmap.  
• Data-driven decision making for service delivery 
and resource sustainability. 
• Availability of skilled human resources to 
handle various functional domains.
• Financing smart cities and financial 
sustainability of ULBs. 
19. Smart Cities for Urban 
Transformation

93
Figure 19.1: Four paradigms to leverage Smart Cities Mission
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leveraging 
SCM 
Engagement 
Economy 
Equity 
Environment 
Way Forward
The following strategies are proposed to leverage 
the Smart Cities Mission across the four paradigms 
of economy, equity, environment and engagement 
in India by 2022-23:
Economy 
• Scaling area-based development: There is a 
need to measure the impact of current area-
based development projects on the ease 
of living, economic growth, investments, 
job creation and citizens’ participation. The 
central government can consider transferring 
the lessons learnt from such area-based 
development projects to other cities. States 
should also be encouraged to launch their own 
state-level missions for other cities.
• 
Mobility: An integrated institutional 
architecture for planning and coordinating 
the regulation of mobility such as a Unified 
Metropolitan Transport Authority is needed. 
Spatial plans should provide for integrating 
land-use and transport planning to support 
more mixed-use development for enhancing 
economic activity, reducing commuting time 
and improving environmental quality. There 
is a need for focused attention to public 
transport, including existing intermediate and 
para-transit services, especially in smaller 
cities. A pooled green transport fund to 
support such investments is recommended. A 
high-level inter-ministerial electric vehicle (EV) 
mission is necessary for proper coordination 
on the EV agenda.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
94
• Achieving desired service delivery levels: Funds 
for the provisioning of basic services and 
infrastructure are accessed from complementary 
missions, such as the Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), and 
Housing for All (HFA). There is a need for a 
framework that mandates measurable outputs 
and outcomes for all capital investments in 
infrastructure and services in cities. These 
outputs and outcomes should be predefined 
and measured at quarterly intervals. The 
present liveability assessment underway will 
provide the baseline for measurement on 73 
indicators.   
• Digital transformation roadmap: Conventionally, 
cities have been using information technology 
and communication (ICT) in three ways: (1) 
use a single application to address burning 
problems, say, waste collection, and then 
add more applications as per the needs and 
priorities of the city; (2) build infrastructure and 
add services, and (3) experiment with a number 
of applications without having a long-term or 
definitive vision in place. 
 The conventional ways ignore the value hidden 
in human interactions – among citizens, with 
the city’s infrastructure (e.g. roads, bridges, 
parks) and the environment. These interactions 
contain data and information and digital 
technology has the potential to recognize and 
capture the hidden value in their interactions. 
To harness internet connectivity and its 
various applications in governance and service 
delivery, cities need to put in place a digital 
transformation roadmap across both hard 
infrastructure and software applications. A 
digital transformation roadmap would recognize 
and capture these interactions and the whole 
becomes greater than the sum of its parts once 
the information that flows in the “systems of 
systems” is captured. 
 Additionally, the digital transformation roadmap 
would also build on the considerable work 
done in cities on geographic information 
systems (GIS) and apply these for geo-locating, 
mapping and publishing public assets in the 
city such as parks, playgrounds, public toilets, 
bus stops, streetlights, manholes, water and 
sewerage lines, storm water drains, power 
lines, etc., and linking these to grievance 
redressal, participatory budgeting, transparent 
works management, and contractor payments. 
Municipal acts need to provide for a digital 
transformation roadmap for ULBs as a 
mandatory policy document, like spatial plans. 
This will also help build data observatories for 
multiple uses, including citizen engagement.
Equity
• 
Inclusive development: Cities must ensure that 
the urban poor and slum dwellers including 
recent migrants can avail of city services and 
subsidies and are financially included through 
the Jan Dhan Yojana. A dedicated benchmark 
could be considered to measure if benefits 
reach the targeted poor. Cities should dedicate 
a single-window facility for the urban poor 
to access basic services such as water supply, 
drainage and sewerage, and affordable 
housing in the form of dormitory and rental 
housing. Urban poor communities and slums, 
benefitted by area-based development (ABD) 
or pan city proposal (PCP) solutions, should be 
mapped in conjunction with improvements in 
parameters such as access to public assets and 
reducing service deficit including in the areas of 
education and health.
95
Environment
• Resilient cities: It is strongly recommended that 
India should mainstream the resilient cities 
approach and integrate it with service levels 
as indicated in the chapter on Approach to 
Sustainability in our National Building Code 
2016. The resilient cities approach should 
also be in line with the 11th Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG), which emphasizes 
the sustainable development of cities and 
communities. Environment sustainability 
should be recognized as a distinct goal and be 
measured as part of service levels. The Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) can 
issue model guidelines in this regard. 
Engagement
• 
Data observatories in partnership with civil 
society: More than 20 smart command and 
control centres are under implementation and 
an equal number are under tendering. About 
six of these centres have been completed in 
Vishakhapatnam, Kakinada, Surat, Nagpur, 
Vadodara and Ahmedabad, with nearly all of 
them using open-source codes. There is need to 
use the information available in these centres 
to develop urban data observatories with a 
flexible architecture and continue open source 
accessibility. The purpose of such observatories 
is to serve as a decision support mechanism 
for policy makers and to engage citizens. The 
MoHUA guidelines should institutionalize the 
need for regulation around data observatories 
and make them open source in nature (by 
limiting private ownership of such data), while 
at the same time protecting the privacy of 
citizens. The data observatory incubated by 
the National Institute of Urban Affairs offers 
one such model. Institutionally, there is need to 
leverage information to achieve better inter-
agency coordination within ULBs and  
with SPVs.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
96
Objectives
The key objectives of the Swachh Bharat Mission 
include: 
1. Making India Open Defecation Free (ODF) by 
October 2, 2019.
2. Carrying out extensive information, education 
and communication (IEC) and behaviour change 
campaigns to change the attitude of people 
regarding healthy sanitation practices.
3. Ensuring scientific solid and liquid waste 
management. 
4. Augmenting the capacity of local bodies.
5. Creating an enabling environment for private 
sector participation. 
6. Eradicating manual scavenging.
Current Situation
The Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) was launched 
on October 2, 2014, to make India open defecation 
free by 2019. It has two sub missions –1) Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Gramin) for rural areas under the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) 
and 2) 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) for urban 
areas under the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs. Given the cross cutting impact of SBM, the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation is the 
nodal ministry for SBM with several other ministries 
being actively involved in achieving its goals. 
SBM has the potential to address wide-ranging 
issues. For instance, water and sanitation related 
diseases continue to remain among the major 
causes of death among children under five years 
of age. In India, the under-five mortality rate is 50 
per thousand live births as compared to the global 
average of 41. The lack of sanitation facilities leads 
to groundwater contamination and pathogen 
contamination leads to diarrhoeal diseases, 
resulting in malnutrition, stunting and death. 
Women, who do not have access to toilets, mostly 
relieve themselves under the cover of darkness, i.e., 
before dawn or after sunset. Such practices are not 
only a threat to their physical security but are also a 
cause of various diseases. 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)
According to Census 2011, only 32.7 per cent of 
rural households had access to toilet facilities. 
Only 39 per cent of households had access to 
toilets before the launch of the Mission. Under the 
Mission, from October 2, 2014 to March 2018, 
about 6.95 crore individual household toilets have 
been constructed. The rapid pace of construction 
of toilets is due to mass mobilization of resources 
and extensive behaviour change campaigns under 
the mission. It has helped the country achieve 
sanitation coverage of 81 per cent in rural India by 
March 2018. About 3.50 lakh villages, 371 districts 
and 13 states and 3 union territories have declared 
themselves ODF .
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban)
As of March 2018, 47.04 lakh household toilets 
and 3.18 lakh seats of community/public toilets 
20. Swachh Bharat Mission

97
4. Non-segregation of waste. 
5. Sustaining the change in behaviour patterns 
among people. 
6. Continued unwillingness of urban local bodies 
(ULBs) to levy user charges.
7. Inadequate infrastructure for collection, 
transportation and processing of segregated 
waste.
8. The continuing practice of decentralized 
treatment of waste. 
9. Lack of on-site treatment of waste by bulk 
generators.
10. Insufficient number of dustbins, particularly in 
urban and peri-urban areas.
11. Lack of credit from financial institutions for solid 
and liquid waste management projects.
12. Discharge of untreated effluent into rivers.
have been constructed against the mission targets 
of 66.42 lakh and 5.08 lakh respectively. Hundred 
per cent door-to-door collection of solid waste has 
been achieved in 62,436 out of 84,049 wards and 
2,648 cities have declared themselves ODF . Waste-
to-energy production has reached 88.4 megawatts 
and new plants that can produce 415 megawatts 
are under construction. 
Constraints
The constraints faced by the mission are largely 
related to implementation challenges in meeting the 
2019 targets. Some of these are as follows:
1. Lack of availability of space for construction of 
household toilets in slum areas. 
2. Issues regarding the operation and maintenance 
of community toilets. 
3. Non-availability of water.
Figure 20.1: Improvement in Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) coverage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
A & N ISLANDS
ANDHRA PRADESH
ARUNACHAL PRADESH
ASSAM
BIHAR
CHANDIGARH
CHHATTISGARH
D & N HAVELI
DAMAN & DIU
GOA
GUJARAT
HARYANA
HIMACHAL PRADESH
JAMMU & KASHMIR
JHARKHAND
KARNATAKA
KERALA
MADHYA PRADESH
MAHARASHTRA
MANIPUR
MEGHALAYA
MIZORAM
NAGALAND
ODISHA
PUDUCHERRY
PUNJAB
RAJASTHAN
SIKKIM
TAMIL NADU
TELANGANA
TRIPURA
UTTAR PRADESH
UTTARAKHAND
WEST BENGAL
ALL INDIA
Coverage (%) 
Coverage as on 02.10.2014 Coverage as on 31.03.18
Source: http://swachhbharatmission.gov.in/
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
98
13. Tackling the problem of lagging states – of 
the 1.56 crore household toilets yet to be 
constructed in rural areas, 0.90 crore are to be 
constructed in two states, namely Uttar Pradesh 
and Bihar.
Way Forward
The strategies to tackle the challenges faced by 
SBM have been categorized under four broad 
heads – expanding the scope of SBM, inducing 
behavioural change, expediting construction and 
leveraging technology, and changing governance 
and practices. These are detailed below.
Expanding the scope of SBM
1. The concept of Swachhata needs to be 
integrated into hospitals, government offices 
and other public establishments.
2. Where space is a constraint, construct 
community toilets with participation and 
ownership of stakeholders. The responsibility 
for operation and maintenance of community 
toilets should vest with the community.
3. To ensure continued usage of toilets and limit 
water used for flushing, rural toilets with steep 
slope should be widely promoted in rural areas. 
4. Bulk generators of waste should ensure on-site 
treatment of waste.
5. All drains/tributaries flowing to rivers should be 
covered with sewage treatment plants by 2022-
23.
6. Give higher monetary compensation and social 
security to rag pickers and small sanitation 
workers for segregating waste. This will help 
waste-to-energy plants as well as projects 
related to dry waste management and help 
reduce the burden on landfills.
7. The scope of SBM may be expanded to cover 
initiatives for landfills and plastic waste.
8. Increase the number of community toilets along 
the highways.
Inducing behavioural change 
1. Plan intensive behaviour change communication 
(BCC) and inter-personal communication (IPC) 
campaigns beyond the SBM target year of 
2019.
2. Draw up a clear and concerted behaviour 
change communication campaign specifically 
aimed at
 panchayats and cities that have shown 
slow progress towards ODF status.
3. Teach them young – Children should be made 
aware of sustainable waste management 
practices through suitable changes in the 
school syllabus; engage college campuses and 
teachers to spread awareness of these practices. 
4. BCC should lay greater emphasis on 
encouraging people to segregate waste into 
wet, dry and hazardous waste right at the point 
of waste generation.
5. Promote disposal of kitchen and home waste 
at the local level through resident welfare 
associations. A decentralized system of disposal 
of waste needs to be in place, especially in 
urban areas.
Expediting construction and leveraging 
technology 
1. To reduce the cost and time incurred on laying 
sewage pipelines and constructing sewage 
treatment plants, SBM should encourage the 
use of bio-digester technology. 
2. A special strategy should be adopted to 
expedite the construction of household toilets in 
the states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
99
3. Adopt the wider use of twin-pit toilets. It is a 
low-cost technology that decomposes waste 
into bio-fertilizer. 
4. Promote the use of modular wet waste disposal 
machines or other such devices for the disposal 
of bio-waste at the household level itself.
5. The cement and construction sectors should 
be encouraged to consume material made of 
recycled construction and demolition (C&D) 
waste. Similarly, the fertilizer sector should 
procure compost produced out of organic 
waste.
6. Ensure the availability of adequate numbers of 
dustbins in public spaces in urban and peri-
urban areas.
Changing governance and practices 
1. Expenditure on bio-toilets/bio-digesters may 
be considered for concession from the goods 
and services tax (GST) to encourage large-scale 
adoption.
2. Draft and implement a 5-year action plan to 
integrate SBM and faecal sludge management 
(FSM) at the ward level in cities. 
3. Waste-to-energy projects are not bankable in 
the absence of tariff orders by the appropriate 
authority. Companies that want to establish 
waste-to-energy plants should have tripartite 
agreements in which one party is the producer 
of energy from waste; the other two should be 
the concerned municipal body and electricity 
distributing company. 
4. ULBs should be nudged to charge adequate 
user charges for collection and disposal of 
waste and maintenance of toilets. The user 
charges for these activities are as important as 
user charges for electricity and water. 
5. Solid and liquid waste management projects 
should be covered under priority sector lending.
6. To maintain the ODF status of villages and 
cities, the government should continue to 
monitor and undertake corrective measures for 
areas that might be slipping back from ODF 
status.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
100
Objectives
By 2022-23, India’s water resources management 
strategy should facilitate water security to ensure 
adequate availability of water for life, agriculture, 
economic development, ecology and environment. 
This broader vision can be achieved by attaining the 
following sectoral goals: 
• Provide adequate (rural: 40 litres per capita per 
day (lpcd); urban 135 lpcd) and safe drinking 
water (piped) and water for sanitation for 
citizens and livestock.
• Provide irrigation to all farms (Har Khet Ko Pani) 
with improved on-farm water-use efficiency 
(more crop per drop).
• Provide water to industries, encourage 
industries to utilize recycled/treated water and 
ensure zero discharge of untreated effluents 
from industrial units.
• Ensure 
Aviral and Nirmal Dhara in the Ganga 
and other rivers along with their tributaries.
• Create additional water storage capacity to 
ensure full utilization of the utilizable surface 
water resources potential of 690 billion cubic 
metres (bcm). 
• Ensure long-term sustainability of finite ground 
water resources.
• Ensure proper operation and maintenance of 
water infrastructure with active participation of 
farmers/consumers.
• Promote R&D to facilitate adoption of the latest 
technologies in the water sector.  
Current Situation 
Annual precipitation in India, including snowfall, 
which is the main source of water, is about 4000 
bcm. About 53.3 per cent of the total precipitation 
is lost due to evapo-transpiration, which leaves a 
balance of 1869 bcm water in the country. Of this, 
the available utilizable water resource potential is 
1137 bcm, comprising 690 bcm of surface water 
and 447 bcm of ground water. 
21. Water Resources
Figure 21.1: Status on average annual water availability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Precipitation 
received 4000 
BCM (100%) 
 
Water Resources 
Potential 1869 
BCM (46.7%) 
Utilizable Water 
Resources 1137 
BCM (28.4%) 
 
Ground Water 
447 BCM 
(11.2%) 
Surface Water 
690 BCM 
(17.2%) 
101
According to the Water and Related Statistics pub-
lished by the Central Water Commission, per capita 
annual water availability in the country has decreased 
from 1816 cubic metres (cu m) in 2001 to 1544 cu 
m in 2011. As per the Falkenmark Index, one of the 
most commonly used measures of water scarcity, if 
the amount of renewable water in a country is below 
1,700 cu m per person per year, the country is said to 
be experiencing water stress; below 1000 cu m it is 
said to be experiencing water scarcity. The National 
Commission for Integrated Water Resources Develop-
ment (NCIWRD) has projected the total demand for 
water at 1,180 bcm for a high demand scenario. 
Water resources are facing pressure due to 
population explosion, urbanization, rising demand 
for water from the agriculture, energy, and industry 
sectors, pollution, inefficient use, poor management 
and poor institutional mechanisms. Several regions 
experience water scarcity due to the uneven 
distribution of water resources over space and time.
The government has specific programmes for 
various aspects of water resources. The scheme, 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), 
which is an umbrella scheme for irrigation has 
prioritized 99 major and medium irrigation projects 
for completion by December 2019. The government 
also launched the “Namami Gange” scheme in 
2014-15 to clean and rejuvenate the River Ganga 
to maintain “
Aviral” and “Nirmal Dhara” and ensure 
its ecological and geological integrity. Data for the 
period 2015-17 indicates improvement in water 
quality in terms of dissolved oxygen and coliform 
bacteria. However, a lot needs to be done in terms 
of meeting the targets of sewage treatment plans 
(STP) and of controlling household and industrial 
waste. Besides, a scheme for groundwater 
development and management to prepare aquifer 
management plans and facilitate sustainable 
management of groundwater has been launched. 
Constraints
1. There is a huge gap between the irrigation 
potential created (112.5 million ha in 2012) and 
the irrigation potential utilized (89.3 million ha 
in 2012). Apart from the underutilization of the 
potential, the efficiency of the irrigation systems 
is low at 30 per cent to 38 per cent for surface 
water and 55 per cent for ground water.
2. Despite clear evidence of rising water 
stress, water is still used inefficiently and 
indiscriminately, particularly in agriculture. Poor 
implementation and maintenance of projects, 
absence of participatory irrigation management, 
non-alignment of cropping patterns to the agro-
climatic zones, and absence of field channels 
(CAD works) are some of the challenges.
3. The Easement Act, 1882, which grants 
groundwater ownership rights to the landowner 
is one of the reasons for water over-use and 
depletion of groundwater levels. 
4. The subsidized pricing of water in various states 
has resulted in non-revenue water and a sharp 
decline in groundwater levels in all states.
5. As per 2011 Census, only 30.8 per cent of the 
total rural households and 70.6 per cent of the 
total urban households get piped water supply.
6. The sustainability of the source and growing 
contamination of ground water in newer areas 
are constraints in ensuring safe drinking water 
supply in rural and urban areas.
Way Forward
1. On-going programmes 
• By 2022-23, the water storage capacity needs 
to be increased from the current level of 253 
bcm to 304 bcm by completing on-going 
projects on time.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
102
• A coordination mechanism at the field level 
may be set up for PMKSY to find the reasons 
for delays in the completion of projects and 
corrective measures undertaken project wise to 
ensure speedy implementation.  
• The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) may 
draw up an action plan to complete CAD works in 
317 identified projects to reduce the gap between 
the irrigation potential created and utilized.
• Other notable programmes that need to be 
completed include the Ken-Betwa River linking 
project, the Pancheshwar project, the Rajasthan 
feeder and Sirhind feeders (Punjab &Rajasthan) 
and the Siang project in North-East India.
• The National Mission for Clean Ganga needs to 
coordinate with the Ministry of Drinking Water, 
Supply and Sanitation for solid and liquid waste 
management in 1600 
gram panchayats (covering 
4464 villages situated on the banks of the Ganga 
in five states). Corrective measures need to be 
taken to expedite the completion of the projects. 
2. Water efficiency
• Incentivize the wider adoption of sprinkler and 
drip irrigation by diverting resources otherwise 
used to subsidize power and surface irrigation.
• As per the fourth Minor Irrigation (MI) Census, 
there are about 5 lakh water bodies/tanks with 
an irrigation potential of 5.89 million ha. For 
these, the MoWR’s programme to revitalize, 
renovate and repair water bodies should be 
significantly expanded and adequately funded. 
•  Special emphasis should be laid on desilting of 
water bodies, including river, lakes, ponds and 
reservoirs.
3. Recycle of waste water
• With the country generating 140 bcm of 
wastewater annually, a pilot scheme to irrigate 
10 lakh ha with treated waste water by 2020 
may initially be taken up. 
• Industries should be encouraged to meet a 
major share of their demand through recycled 
water. Besides, programmes for smart water 
meters and tradable permits for use of recycled 
water may be launched.
4. Groundwater management 
• As on date, development of groundwater, i.e., 
utilization of groundwater resources vis-à-vis 
replenishable quantity, is 62 per cent. There is a 
need to develop recharging zones at identified 
places to make groundwater resources 
sustainable using check dam, farm ponds, tanks 
and injection wells.
• Participatory aquifer management initiated in 
the 12th Plan National Aquifer Management 
(NAQUIM) under PMKSY should be 
strengthened through a network of partnerships 
to control unbridled, competitive extraction 
of groundwater since it is virtually impossible 
to police more than 30 million groundwater 
structures through licences and permits. 
• The participatory approach to encourage 
behavioural changes and community 
engagement in ground water management at 
the 
gram panchayat level as envisaged in the 
Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY) should be adopted 
and extended to other regions.
• Promote the use of solar pumps to improve 
the utilisation of groundwater in Eastern India 
where utilisation is hampered by the lack of 
power. In Western India, solar pumps with a 
buyback guarantee for surplus solar power can 
offer reliable daytime energy for irrigation and 
stable cash income as well act as an incentive 
to conserve power and water.
• PMKSY – 
Har Khet Ko Pani – envisaging 
enhancement of food production more than 
two-fold in 96 prioritized most ‘deprived 
irrigation districts’ in 12 states by creating 
103
irrigation facilities through tube wells, dug wells, 
bore wells and dug-cum-bore wells, should be 
expedited. This will facilitate assured irrigation in 
tribal and backward areas that traditionally have 
been deprived of canal irrigation. 
• Special focus should be placed on the quality of 
rural drinking water supply in arsenic and fluo-
ride affected areas by tapping multiple sources 
through conjunctive use of surface water, ground 
water and rain water harvesting. All new, piped 
water supply schemes should have mandatory 
provisions on operation and maintenance involv-
ing local communities and stakeholders.
5. Water harvesting 
a. Watershed (check dam development) 
• The MoWR may develop specific strategies to 
tap water through watershed development 
(check dams) in rain-fed areas, expand 
micro irrigation coverage to 80 lakh ha, and 
link ground water development to aquifer 
mapping. 
• The timeline for watershed development 
projects needs to be shortened from seven 
to four years with special efforts by state 
governments. Funds available under MGNREGA 
and state plans may be used for watershed 
development projects. 
• Introduce public-private partnerships in 
the water sector, initially to develop micro-
irrigation-based CAD works based on a hybrid 
annuity model. This should be accompanied 
by a revision in water tariffs to recover at least 
operation and maintenance costs.
b. Rainwater harvesting
•  Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 circulated by 
Ministry of Urban Development includes the 
provision of rain water harvesting. Barring the 
states/UTs of Manipur, Sikkim, Mizoram and 
Lakshadweep, all states have incorporated the 
provision in their respective Building Bye Laws. 
It is suggested that the states ensure effective 
implementation of the rain water harvesting 
structures for buildings.
6. Suggested reforms
• To mitigate conflicts and achieve equitable 
distribution of water, an integrated river basin 
management approach needs to be adopted. 
The setting up of river basin organisations for 
major basins may be expedited.
• NITI Aayog has developed a concept note 
on Revitalization of Rivers, which may be 
implemented on a pilot basis before being 
expanded across major states.
• To ensure 
Aviral and Nirmal Dhara in the 
Ganga, the river should be managed as a single 
system.  
• There is need for a scheme on medium term 
measures for flood management. This should 
include completion of incomplete works in the 
states of Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Uttara-
khand and West Bengal. Besides, long term 
measures for Bihar, UP and NE states should 
be explored to achieve permanent protection 
from floods. The formation of North East Water 
Management Authority (NEWMA) in North-
East states will comprehensively address the 
flood issue in the region.
• A water regulatory framework should be 
established for water resources in all states.
• An action plan should be drawn up to improve 
water use efficiency (with 2017 as the base 
year) by 20 per cent in all sectors by 2022.
• The composite water management index 
developed by NITI Aayog may be used as a 
potent tool to assess and further improve the 
efficiency of water resources management.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
104
Objective
The objective is to maintain a clean, green and 
healthy environment with peoples’ participation 
to support higher and inclusive economic growth 
through sustainable utilization of available natural 
resources. The 2022-23 goals include the following.
Air pollution:
• Bringing down PM2.5 levels in Indian cities to 
less than 50.
• Creating 175 GW of renewable energy 
generation capacity.
• Eliminating crop residue burning.
• Ensuring the coverage of all households with 
LPG for cooking.
Solid waste management
• Implementing effectively the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016.
Water pollution
• Encouraging industries to utilize recycled/
treated water to the extent possible and 
ensuring zero discharge of untreated effluents 
from industrial units.
• Ensuring 
Aviral and Nirmal Dhara in the Ganga, 
Yamuna, and other rivers.
Forestry
• Increasing the forest cover to 33.3 per cent 
of the geographical area, as envisaged in the 
National Forest Policy, 1988.
• Improving the quality of existing forests.
• Encouraging Farm Forestry. 
Current Situation 
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has 
identified 302 polluted river stretches on 275 rivers. 
The government is aware of this challenge and 
has launched National Mission for Clean Ganga 
to address this concern. The total polluted riverine 
length is 12,363 km. Moreover, Indian cities face 
a high risk of air pollution. The rise in air pollution 
can be attributed to rapid industrialization, high 
urbanization, increased use of vehicles, uncontrolled 
burning of crop residue and emissions from coal 
power plants and brick kilns, etc. 
Forests are critical to achieving sustainable 
environmental management. In March 2018, the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
released the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018. The 
1894 and 1952 versions of the forest policy largely 
focused on the production and revenue generation 
aspects. The National Forest Policy of 1988, for the 
first time, focused on environmental sustainability. 
The new National Forest Policy seeks to increase 
the sustainability of forest management in India. At 
present, forest and tree cover occupies about one-
fourth of the total geographical area in our country. 
The new forest policy aims to increase this share to 
33.3 per cent. Moreover, out of the total land area 
under forest cover, about 40 per cent has only 10 to 
40 per cent canopy density.
22. Sustainable Environment
105
 Solid waste generation and its treatment 
is a pressing concern as well. In 2016, the 
government had estimated an annual waste 
generation of 62 million tonnes in the country, 
including 5.6 million tonnes of plastic waste, 
0.17 million tonnes of bio-medical waste, 7.90 
million tonnes of hazardous waste and 1.5 
million tonnes of e-waste. Of this, between 22 
and 28 per cent was processed and treated.1 
Constraints
1. A major contributor to air pollution is the 
practice of burning crop residue, particularly in 
North India. Convincing farmers to discontinue 
the practice by providing alternative methods of 
disposal through economically productive use of 
crop residues is a key challenge. 
2. Lack of awareness of the ill effects of pollution 
impedes efforts to control pollution. This makes 
it difficult to bring about the behavioural 
change that is critical to fighting pollution.
3. ‘Polluters should pay for the pollution’ principle 
is not effectively implemented. 
4. Agro-forestry is hampered by regulatory 
restrictions. Besides, biodiversity conservation 
and maintenance of healthy habitats for wild 
life have to be aligned with sustainability goals.
Way Forward
Crop residue burning
To eliminate the practice of burning biomass (crop 
residue), the Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers’ Welfare should introduce suitable 
modifications in their guidelines of schemes for 
farm mechanization to provide support to farmers 
to purchase equipment to collect, transport and 
sell biomass to processing sites for economic 
benefits. 
The Task Force on Biomass Management, 
constituted by NITI Aayog under the ‘Cleaner 
Air, Better Life’ initiative, has made the following 
key recommendations in its report titled “ Action 
Plan for Biomass Management” that need to be 
implemented by the central and state governments 
expeditiously: 
• Extend financial support to farmers in the short-
term for in-situ treatment of paddy-straw/non-
burning of crop residue.
• Create a “Clean Air Impact Fund” to provide 
viability gap funding (VGF) for projects with 
long gestation periods and low returns on 
investment such as bio-power or bio-ethanol 
projects.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KEY PILLARS FOR 
SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENT 
Limit Crop 
Residue Burning 
Reduce Air, Water 
& Noise Pollution 
Solid Waste 
Management 
Forest 
Management 
Climate  Change 
Mitigation 
Figure 22.1: Strategies for achieving sustainable environment
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
106
• Upscale technologies for crop harvesting and 
utilization of farm residue 
o Support service-based shared infrastructure.
o Provide process-based incentives for 
entrepreneurs. 
o Allow accelerated depreciation for farm 
implements.
• Reward and monitoring at the local level 
o Institute a reward scheme for village 
panchayats with zero burning.
o Put in place a mechanism to monitor farm 
fires.
• Provide regulatory support for business models 
for crop residue utilization
o Re-assess the fuel quality criteria for 
briquettes/pellets made out of crop residue.
o Issue directives to power plants to procure 
paddy-straw briquette/pellet.
o Remove the size limitation for bio-power 
captive generation.
• Create awareness amongst farmers for better 
soil management practices 
o Plan awareness campaigns for farmers.
o Recognize farmers following non-burning 
practices.
o Design information tools for in-situ 
mulching and on-farm management.
Solid waste management and air, water and soil 
pollution
• Effective implementation of Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016, which has 
significantly expanded the scope of efficient solid 
waste management in the country, will help 
achieve environmental sustainability by 2022-23. 
• It is necessary to ensure the remediation 
of contaminated sites, safe disposal of 
hazardous substances, protection and 
restoration of ecosystems through stringent 
enforcement of relevant Acts, implementation 
of specific schemes, generation of awareness, 
stakeholders’ participation and application of 
best practices. Action plans for remediation of 
contaminated sites should be prepared and 
implemented.
• The air pollution issue will require continued 
efforts on the 
Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana . 
The scheme has already met with resounding 
success and it is recommended that continued 
efforts be made to prevent any slippage back 
to cooking using solid bio mass. Initially, the 
scheme aimed to distribute 50 million LPG 
connections to BPL households by 2019; 
however, the target has been increased to 
80 million households. As of 19 March 2018, 
about 35 million connections had been 
released.  
• A task force should be set up to study and 
implement measures to control pollution from 
brick kilns. The focus of this task force should 
be on the technological upgradation of kilns to 
control pollution. 
• Emission and effluent standards for industries 
need to be revised and effectively implemented.
• Sewage treatment plants of adequate capacity 
should be installed at suitable locations to make 
rivers pollution free.
• Wastewater discharge from industrial units 
into rivers and other water bodies should be 
reduced to zero.
• The use of bio-digester toilets, a technology 
licensed by the Defence Research and 
107
Development Organisation (DRDO), may 
be expeditiously considered for nationwide 
implementation. It can be a complete game 
changer as, if successful, it can do away with 
the need to have sewers and sewage treatment 
plants. 
• Revised waste management rules including 
Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, Bio-Medical Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, E-Waste (Management) Rules, 
Hazardous and other Wastes (Management 
and Trans-boundary Movement) Rules and 
Construction & Demolition Waste Management 
Rules should be effectively implemented.
• Introduce an eco-labelling scheme to promote 
the sale of products made out of waste. 
• Introduce stringent civil penalties to strengthen 
enforcement of environment-related Acts.
Forest management
• Afforestation should be promoted aggressively 
through joint forest management (peoples’ 
participation) and the involvement of the 
private sector. Highly denuded forests and 
wastelands in the country could be leased 
out to the private sector for specified periods 
for afforestation. Participation of people, 
particularly those dependent on forests for their 
livelihood, may also be encouraged along with 
the private sector.
• Public land available along railway tracks, 
highways, canals, etc., should be used for 
greening India. Further, re-stocking of degraded 
forests needs to be accorded priority. 
• We should tap the huge scope that exists in 
agro-forestry. States and UTs may consider 
exemption of trees grown on private farmland 
from permit/transit pass. Revenue record and 
geo tagging should be used to verify the origin 
of wood and wood-based products to identify 
species extracted from farm forestry. 
• The new National Forest Policy, after 
incorporating the comments of states, 
concerned central ministries/departments and 
other stakeholders, should be expeditiously 
implemented. 
• The boundaries of national parks and wildlife 
sanctuaries, which cover more than 5 per cent 
of the country’s geographical area, need to be 
protected and habitats for wildlife kept healthy.
•  Undertake measures to convert vacant spaces 
in urban areas into urban green areas. This 
will help increase the overall tree cover in the 
country, which is presently 2.85 per cent of 
the geographical area, as per the India State of 
Forest Report 2017.
Climate change
• By 2030, 40 per cent of cumulative power 
generation capacity installed should be non-
fossil fuel based. The strategies to achieve this 
are given in the chapter on Energy Supply and 
Demand. 
• Access to low cost finance especially through 
the Green Climate Fund should be encouraged.
• Review all eight national missions under the 
National Action Plan on Climate Change in 
the light of new scientific information and 
technological advances.
• New national missions on wind energy, 
waste-to-energy and coastal areas should be 
developed.
• The National Water Mission should be 
re-designed for efficient water resource 
management. Similarly, the National Mission on 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
108
Sustainable Agriculture should be redesigned to 
increase agricultural productivity and contribute 
significantly to achieving the vision of doubling 
farmers’ income by 2022-23. 
• Projects under state action plans on climate 
change that have been endorsed by the Nation-
al Steering Committee on Climate Change need 
to be implemented.
• Use the National Adaptation Fund for 
Climate Change and other global funds for 
strengthening resilience against climate change 
in sectors like agriculture, forestry, infrastructure 
and others. 
• Scientific and analytical capacity for climate 
change related assessments should be 
strengthened.
________________________________________
1 ‘Solid Waste Management Rules Revised After 16 Years; Rules Now Extend to Urban and Industrial Areas’: Javadekar, Press Informa-
tion Bureau, Government of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, April 5, 2016.
INCLUSION
111
Objectives
•   Universal access and retention:
o  Hundred per cent enrolment and retention 
at elementary education and secondary 
education levels; achieve zero dropouts until 
Class X.
o  Equitable participation by all society seg-
ments, in terms of attendance, retention 
and years of schooling to ensure maximum 
social inclusion.
• Improvement in learning outcomes for 
elementary and secondary education, as 
measured by successive rounds of the National 
Achievement Survey (NAS).
•  Creating a robust framework for tracking 
individual students across their schooling years 
that incorporates data on their learning outcomes.
•  Providing a real and viable alternative path for 
vocational education starting at higher levels to 
improve employability.
23. School Education
Figure 23.1: Gross and net enrolment ratios for elementary, secondary and  
senior secondary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
GER NER GER NER GER NER
Elementary Secondary Senior Secondary
Enrolment Ratios (%) 
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Source: Unified District Information System for Education (U-DISE)

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
112
•  Strengthening support for children as part of 
the school curriculum to improve child mental 
health.
Current Situation
The enrolment ratios for the elementary level 
are close to 100 per cent. In addition, the gross 
enrolment ratios (GER) for secondary education have 
also increased, even though the net enrolment ratio 
(NER) is still low. Moreover, data shows enrolment is 
largely similar across gender and castes.
The ASER surveys estimate that national attendance 
in primary and upper primary schools is 71.4 
per cent and 73.2 per cent respectively, with 
considerable differences across states.1  The 
retention rates in elementary school are 70.7 per 
cent. The retention rates amongst scheduled tribes 
(STs) is 50.1 per cent.  
The learning outcomes of those enrolled in the 
schooling system need improvement. The previous 
NAS conducted by National Council for Educational 
Research and Training (NCERT) reports that over 60 
per cent of Grade V students scored below 50 per 
cent across subjects. Findings by an independent 
ASER household level survey (2016) in rural areas 
shows that among Grade V children, only 47.8 per 
cent could read Grade II level text and only 26 per 
cent could do Grade V level arithmetic.
Despite increasing access, enrolment in government 
primary schools declined by 2.31 crores in absolute 
numbers from 2007-08 to 2015-16 while enrolment 
in private primary schools increased by 1.45 crores 
over the same period.
2 The reasons for the move 
from public to private schools is the perception 
of better quality of education provided by private 
schools amongst parents (which is also borne out 
Figure 23.2: Learning outcomes from ASER survey 2016 for rural areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Proportion of Students (%) 
Class 
Proportion of children not able to do standard 2 para reading
Proportion of children not able to do division (three to one)
Source: ASER (2016) 
Note: The division problem was three digit numbers by a one-digit number.
113
from data by ASER over the years), and growth in 
private schools having affordable fees. 
The government has already made significant 
efforts  towards addressing the issue of poor 
learning outcomes. Recent changes by the 
government include the introduction of a new and 
comprehensive National Achievement Survey. The 
Ministry of Human Resource Development has also 
spelt out the competencies and learning levels at 
different grades on which school grading will be 
based. 
In 2016-17, 4,790 vocational training schools 
across India were approved for providing vocational 
education at the secondary level. Of these, 3,662 
schools are implementing the scheme.
Finally, the mental pressure on students, especially 
in secondary education, has been increasing. Data 
from the National Crime Records Bureau shows 
that student suicides have increased from about 
6,600 in 2012 to about 9,000 in 2015, many of 
these because of stress related to examinations and 
careers. Thus, there is a need to reduce the mental 
stress students suffer from. 
Constraints
• Inadequate public funding in the sector.
• Disproportionate focus on school infrastructure 
as opposed to learning outcomes.
• Challenges in governance and monitoring 
mechanisms for learning outcomes.
• Accountability systems in government schools.
• Inadequate teacher training, large number of 
teaching vacancies and rampant absenteeism.
• Limited options for vocational education in the 
school system.
• Inadequate support and counselling given to 
children in schools.
Way Forward
1. Education sector funding by government
Government spending on education as a whole 
(not just school education) should be increased 
to at least 6 per cent of GDP by 2022. At present, 
allocations to the education sector by the centre 
and states remains close to 3 per cent of GDP , while 
according to the World Bank, the world average in 
this regard is 4.7 per cent of GDP .
2. Revamped governance system to improve 
monitoring and accountability
State governments should develop and formulate 
robust mechanisms to enforce regulations on 
teacher qualifications, teacher absenteeism and 
learning outcomes. Learning outcomes should be 
regularly assessed by bodies independent of the 
line ministries.
3. Gearing the system towards learning 
outcomes
Rationalize public school structure
School integration or clubbing of small schools 
(i.e. those with very low enrolment – see Table 
23.1 below) could result in additional human, 
financial and infrastructure resources. States like 
Rajasthan have already initiated school integration 
programmes along with improved transport 
facilities for sparsely populated regions to achieve 
both higher quality and savings. The preliminary 
result of these reforms has been a reduction in 
teacher vacancies from 60 per cent to 33 per cent, 
and a 6 per cent increase in enrolment in one year. 
In addition, retention rates have also increased, 
especially for girls.
3 Rajasthan’s experience could be 
a good model to replicate.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
114
Right to learning and measurement of 
remediation
• Given the amendment to Rule 23(2) of the 
RTE, states should codify the expected learning 
outcomes for each class and put greater 
emphasis on continuous and comprehensive 
evaluation (CCE) to achieve the defined learning 
outcomes. 
• The comprehensive national achievements 
survey initiated in 2017 needs to be 
institutionalised on an annual basis.
• The remediation process should be made part 
of the education system and should be run 
concurrently with regular classes so that no 
child gets left behind. 
• In addition, high-school readiness programmes/
tutorials, including bridge programmes, 
should be incorporated just after class VIII or 
in the early months of class IX especially for 
remediation.
• The CCE should also encompass compartmental 
exams to check the quality and outcomes of 
remediation. Passing each subject either directly 
or through subsequent CCE could be made a 
necessary condition for eligibility to appear 
in the subsequent grade’s exam. This may be 
implemented with or without the ‘no detention 
policy’.
Individualized tracking
An electronic national educational registry may be 
conceptualised for tracking each child’s learning 
outcomes based on CCE and final exams through a 
unique ID. This will help track the cohort survival 
rate, and monitor students requiring remediation. 
It will also help prepare a list of children who drop 
out after the elementary education level. Further, 
this will enable greater attention to be paid to the 
needs of children from socially deprived groups and 
those with physical or intellectual disabilities.
4. Flexibility in education stream and 
vocational education
• Develop a system of awarding credits for 
every subject and grade passed, specifying 
the minimum credits required to appear in the 
final exam for any grade. This system of credits 
may remain valid forever and be seamlessly 
integrated across different levels of education, 
providing an opportunity for life-long tracking 
of learning outcomes in the electronic national 
educational registry. This will enable bright 
children to amass more credits in the subjects 
of their interest, once the system attains 
maturity.
• Give children the option, under the guidance 
of the school and parents, of branching into 
vocational courses from secondary school level 
Table 23.1: Profile of public schools with low enrolment
Source: Geeta Gandhi Kingdon, “Put the onus on teachers”, Indian Express
Type of public school Number of  
schools
Avg. students 
per school
Avg. spend per 
child per year
Total teacher  
salary bill
20 students or less enrolled ~1,00,000 12.7 Rs. 80,000 9,440 cr.
50 students or less enrolled ~3,70,000 29 Rs. 40,800 41,630 cr.
115
upwards. Only children who expressly choose 
to continue with general education should be 
allowed to do so.
• Develop separate track even within the general 
education stream, as has been done in certain 
advanced countries. A specially devised 
aptitude test must be conducted in the IX grade 
and re-checked in the Xth grade, based on 
which students should be given the option of 
choosing a ‘regular’ track versus an ‘advanced’ 
track. These two tracks would differ in the 
difficulty level and choice of subjects. Those 
pursuing the ‘regular’ track should be given 
the option of completing the ‘advanced’ track 
syllabus through open schooling at a later point 
in life.
• Design guidelines for states to implement 
vocational education at the school level, which 
may cover aspects such as selection of schools/
trades, tendering process for labs, database of 
industry contacts for field visits/guest lectures, 
timings, workshops, permitting informal 
apprenticeships or assistantship in the formal 
system, etc.
• Pilot different innovation models in vocational 
education and provide adequate funding for 
successful innovative programmes.
5. Curriculum/syllabus
• Pre-primary and primary syllabus should 
be designed on a skill/competency-based 
continuum. At the pre-primary level, it would 
help develop school readiness, and at the 
primary level, it would facilitate multi-level and 
multi-grade teaching.
• The vocational education syllabus should be 
NSQF-aligned and ensure smooth transition 
from school education to vocational education.
• The curriculum should include summer activities 
and monthly study trips, including visits to 
practitioners for practical learning.
6. Teacher training
• Improving the quality of teaching is an integral 
aspect of improvement in school education. 
Given its importance, it is being covered 
separately in another chapter.
7. Reducing mental stress 
• The above recommendations in terms of 
remedial education and allowing different 
tracks of education will help address students’ 
mental stress. 
• Life skills, including coping with failure/crises 
and stress management, should be included as 
part of the school curriculum.
• Easy and safe access to mental health support 
should be strengthened. Child helplines should 
feed into easy and safe access to counselling in 
schools, especially for children at risk.
• Easy and safe access to counselling and support 
must be provided for girl children in schools, 
especially focused on victims of abuse, violence 
and other gender-related social evils.
________________________________________
1 ASER 2016. 
2 Elementary education in India: Trends, National University of Educational Planning and Administration.
3 http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/UNICEF-report-shows-results-of-integrated-schools-in-Rajasthan/article14463872.ece. 
Accessed May 03, 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
116
Objectives
• Increase the gross enrolment ratio (GER) in 
higher education from 25 per cent in 2016-17 
to 35 per cent by 2022-23.
• Make higher education more inclusive for the 
most vulnerable groups.
• Adopt accreditation as a mandatory quality 
assurance framework and have multiple highly 
reputed accreditation agencies for facilitating 
the process.
• Create an enabling ecosystem to enhance the 
spirit of research and innovation.
• Improve employability of students completing 
their higher education.
Current Situation
India has 864 university-level institutions, 40,026 
colleges and 11,669 stand-alone institutions.1 The 
number of university-level institutions has grown 
by about 25 per cent and the number of colleges 
by about 13 per cent in the last five years. The 
private sector accounts for a large share of these 
institutions, managing 36.2 per cent of universities, 
77.8 per cent of colleges and 76 per cent of stand-
alone institutions in 2016-17.
India’s higher education GER (calculated for the age 
group, 18-23 years) increased from 11.5 per cent in 
2005-06 to 25.2 per cent in 2016-17. However, we 
lag behind the world average of 33 per cent and that 
of comparable economies, such as Brazil (46 per cent), 
Russia (78 per cent) and China (30 per cent).2  Korea 
has a higher education GER of over 93 per cent.3 
In addition, regional and social disparities continue 
to exist in higher education: GER varies from 
5.5 per cent in Daman & Diu to 56.1 per cent in 
Chandigarh. Figure 24.1 indicates GER in terms of 
gender and social groups. GER is 26.0 per cent for 
males and 24.5 per cent for females, with females 
constituting 46.8 per cent of the total enrolment of 
35.7 million. While the GERs for scheduled castes 
(SCs), scheduled tribes (STs), other backward castes 
(OBCs) and minorities have been increasing, these 
are still below the overall average in most cases. 
Quality is a challenge in higher education in India. 
Few Indian institutions feature in the top 200 in 
world rankings. In comparison, China has seven 
universities in the top 150 (3 in top 50) of the 
Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) world rankings. These 
rankings did rank three IITs and the IISc amongst 
the top 20 BRICS universities in 2018. Another issue 
is the employability of graduates. 
Recognising the need to improve access, equity and 
excellence in higher education in the country, the 
government has taken significant steps, including 
the following: 
• Implementation and continuation of the 
centrally sponsored scheme, 
Rashtriya 
Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA): This 
scheme seeks to improve access, equity and 
quality in state higher education institutions 
through a reforms-based approach and links 
funding to performance.
4  The continuation of 
RUSA was recently approved until March 2020 
24. Higher Education

117
Figure 24.1: Gross enrolment ratio in higher education, 2016-17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Male Female SC ST India
Enrolment Ratio (%) 
Source: All India Survey on Higher Education, 2016-17
with an almost three-fold increase in allocation 
compared to that in its first phase (2013-17). 
The second phase of RUSA puts a premium on 
quality enhancement and addresses concerns 
of access and equity in the aspirational districts 
identified by the NITI Aayog.  
• National assessment and accreditation re-
forms: While making accreditation of higher 
education institutions mandatory, the reforms 
move away from an intrusive system to a more 
enabling, mixed method of assessment and 
accreditation. The process of accreditation has 
been fast-tracked and made more transparent. 
The emphasis is more on self-assessment, data 
capture, validation by third party evaluation and 
objective peer review. This is a paradigm shift 
from the subjective assessment parameters ad-
opted earlier. Ongoing reforms  could lead to the 
empanelment of multiple accreditation agencies.
• Regulations for graded autonomy to 
universities and autonomous colleges: A three-
tiered graded autonomy regulatory system 
has been initiated, with the categorization of 
institutions as per their accreditation score by 
the National Assessment and Accreditation 
Council (NAAC) or other empanelled 
accreditation agencies, or by their presence 
in reputed world rankings. Category I and 
Category II universities will have significant 
autonomy as shown in Figure 24.2. Similarly, 
the University Grants Commission (UGC) has 
also issued new regulations for granting 
autonomy based on accreditation scores for 
colleges. These colleges will have the freedom 
to conduct examinations, prescribe evaluation 
systems and even announce results but are not 
allowed to grant degrees. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
118
Constraints
• Outdated and multiple regulatory mechanisms 
limit innovation and progressive change.
• Outdated curriculum results in a mismatch 
between education and job market 
requirements, dampens students’ creativity and 
hampers the development of their analytical 
abilities.
• Quality assurance or accreditation mechanisms 
are inadequate.
• There is no policy framework for participation 
of foreign universities in higher education.
• There is no overarching funding body to 
promote and encourage research and 
innovation.
• Public funding in the sector remains inadequate.
• There are a large number of faculty 
posts lying vacant, for example in central 
universities, nearly 33 per cent of teacher 
posts were vacant in March 2018;
5  faculty 
training is inadequate.
Way Forward
1. Regulatory and governance reforms 
• Ensure effective coordination of roles of 
different higher education regulators, such 
as the UGC, All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) and National Council for 
Teacher Education (NCTE), and restructure or 
merge these where needed.
Figure 24.2: UGC’s graded autonomy regulations for universities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Category I: 
•Open constituent units/off-campus centres within its geographical jurisdiction  
•Open research parks, incubation centres, university society linkage centre 
•Academic collaboration with top foreign institutions 
•Exemption from section 12B inspections & annual monitoring of off-campus 
centres/study centres of private universities 
•Start a new course/dept/school/centre 
•Start NSQF-aligned skill courses 
•Hire foreign faculty 
•Merit-based incentives for faculty to attract talent 
•Admit upto 20% of foreign students on merit with freedom to fix fees 
•Offer courses in open & distance learning mode 
Category II: 
•Start a new course/programme/department/school/centre 
•Start NSQF-aligned skill courses 
•Hire foreign faculty 
•Merit-based incentives to faculty to attract talent 
•Admit upto 20% of foreign students on merit, with freedom 
to fix fees 
•Offer courses in open and distance learning mode  
Category III: No changes in regulation 
Source: UGC
119
• Amend the UGC Act to provide legislative 
backing to the tiered regulatory structure.
• Create a framework to allow foreign 
universities of global repute to operate in India, 
in collaboration with Indian institutions to offer 
joint degree programmes.
• Ensure that the selection process of Vice-
Chancellors of universities is transparent and 
objective.
• Link at least a proportion of the grants to 
performance and quality.
2. Curriculum design
• Domain experts in each educational 
field should be asked to develop a basic 
minimum standard in curriculum that will 
serve as a benchmark for institutions at the 
undergraduate and post-graduate levels. 
Institutions should be given the freedom to 
innovate and expand curriculum beyond this 
basic minimum standard. Curriculum and 
pedagogy at all higher education institutions 
should be updated continuously through 
mandatory feedback from domain experts, 
faculty, students, industry, and alumni.
• Diverse post-secondary career options should 
be provided through skills/vocational training 
that should be integrated seamlessly with 
higher education and the skilling mission.
• Internships by students in undergraduate 
courses should be encouraged and potentially 
mandated in all professional and technical 
courses. This would help with the practical 
orientation of students.
3. Reforming accreditation framework
• All higher education institutions must be 
compulsorily and regularly accredited. Despite 
a two-fold increase in accreditation levels in 
the last five years, accreditation coverage is 
still inadequate. One way to bridge this gap 
by 2022-23 is to allow credible accreditation 
agencies, empanelled through a transparent, 
high quality process, to provide accreditation. 
Accreditation must give adequate weightage 
to outcomes rather than inputs only. Public 
information material brought out by institutions 
and their websites should prominently display 
the accreditation status and grade.
4. Creating ‘world class universities’
• Twenty universities – 10 each from the public 
and private sector – are being selected as 
‘Institutions of Eminence’ and are helping to 
attain world-class standards of teaching and 
research. The funding of INR 1,000 crore over 
a 5-year period to each institution, planned for 
selected public universities, could be further 
increased. Further, a graded mechanism to 
ensure additional funds flow to the top public 
universities should be developed. This is similar 
to the model adopted by Singapore and China 
to develop their top two public universities.
5. Performance-linked funding and incentives
• Only two out of 47 central universities have 
NAAC scores of above 3.51, despite generous 
funding available to them. An evaluation may 
be undertaken to understand the challenges 
faced by these central universities, and they 
should be asked to develop strategic plans for 
getting into the top 500 of global universities 
rankings in the next 10 years. 
• Going forward, funding to these institutions 
should be linked to performance and outcomes 
through the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development and the newly constituted Higher 
Education Funding Agency. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
120
• RUSA may be continued beyond March 2020, 
subject to a credible third-party evaluation. 
This reforms-based scheme has already made 
significant headway in getting state public 
education institutions into the mainstream. 
Continued support, linked to performance, 
will go a long way in pushing some of India’s 
leading state public universities up the ranking 
ladder.
6. Development of teacher resources
• Develop stringent norms for faculty recruitment 
in universities and colleges. A rigorous and 
transparent process of identifying the best 
talent for the higher education sector should be 
put in place. An ecosystem should be created 
where the most deserving talent is hired and 
retained. This should include eligibility tests 
of a high standard, such as existing UGC-
recognised NET , as a minimum eligibility 
criterion for faculty recruitment, to ensure 
recruitment of candidates with academic and/
or research aptitude.
• Quality teaching skills are in short supply 
across disciplines. A central scheme may be 
launched to attract teachers of Indian origin.
• Enable and encourage the recruitment of 
practitioners with distinguished experience 
from professional bodies/industry as faculty. 
This can be achieved through the creation 
of a separate parallel track, on which the 
mandatory Ph.D qualification for faculty may 
be relaxed. These industry practitioners may 
also be encouraged to join as adjunct faculty in 
the higher education institutions.
• Introduce pre-service faculty training (3-6 
months), including faculty exposure to the 
latest tools/techniques of quality teaching 
and research. Continuous faculty training and 
updating process should be introduced and 
made mandatory.
• Develop a system of outcome-based faculty 
evaluation in higher education, which is flexible 
across different categories of institutions.
• Conduct regular quality checks of journals, espe-
cially those that are used for evaluating faculty 
on academic performance indicators (APIs).
7. Distance and online education
• There is a need to broaden the scope of Mas-
sive Open Online Course (MOOCs) and Open 
and Distance Learning (ODL) and tap their 
potential to provide access to quality education 
beyond geographical boundaries. Universities 
with high accreditation scores may be permit-
ted to offer online education programmes. In 
regular courses, technology could be leveraged 
to overcome faculty shortages. 
________________________________________
1 AISHE 2016-17.
2 UNESCO, 2013.
3 World Bank.
4 ww.rusa.nic.in. Accessed May 10, 2018..
5 Ministry of Human Resource Development.
121
Objectives
There cannot be a quality education system without 
quality teachers. Therefore, a thorough revamp of 
the entire ecosystem of teacher education both at 
the school and college level is necessary. In this 
context, the objectives for 2022-23 include:
• Enforcing minimum teacher standards through 
rigorous teacher eligibility tests and criteria for 
the induction of teachers.
• Improving in-service teacher training system.
• Increasing teacher accountability for learning 
outcomes of students.
• Addressing the problem of teacher vacancies 
and teacher absenteeism. 
Current Situation
The current institutional framework for teachers 
training consists of the following: 
• The National Council for Teacher Education 
(NCTE) is the regulator for teacher education in 
the country. 
• NCTE has recognized 23,219 teacher-training 
institutes in the country. Around 90 per cent 
of these are privately run, of which 1,011 
institutions
1  are for training teacher-educators 
(M Ed).  The intake of these teacher-training 
institutes was 17.58 lakh in 2016.
• The in-service training framework includes 592 
District Institutes of Educational Training (DIETs), 
112 Colleges of Teacher Education (CTEs), 35 
Institutes of Advanced Studies (IASEs) and 17 
Block Institutes of Teacher Education (BITEs).  
The block resource centres (BRCs) and cluster 
resource centres (CRCs) form the lowest rung 
of institutions providing in-service training to 
schoolteachers. 
As per the Right to Education (RTE) Act, a teacher 
appointed in schools should have passed the 
teacher eligibility test (TET) conducted by the 
relevant government body. In institutions of higher 
education, passing the National Eligibility Test 
(NET)/State Level Eligibility test (SLET) has been the 
minimum eligibility criterion for teaching.
While teacher education institutes churn out a 
large number of candidates with a Bachelor’s 
and Master’s in education, the quality of teacher 
education has not been assured. In 2015, only 
13.53 per cent candidates who sat for the Central 
Teacher Eligibility Test (CTET) qualified.
2  A primary 
reason for this is inadequate accreditation and 
grading process followed by NCTE in the past. 
In 2017, NCTE initiated the process of collecting 
information from the institutes and grading them 
based on their learning outcomes. At the higher 
educational level, the pass percentage in the 
UGC-NET exams is also low, where only 6 per cent 
candidates qualify. Besides, the quality of PhDs in 
severals institutions does not rise to the required 
standard.
In-service teacher training needs upgradation. 
While only about 20 per cent of school teachers are 
still professionally untrained,3  only 14.9 per cent 
25. Teacher Education and Training

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
122
teachers received in-service training for elementary 
education in 2015-16 even though the Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) has a provision of 20 days of in-service 
training for all teachers. The BRCs and CRCs are 
primarily involved in administrative work and provide 
very little resource support to schools.
In 2017, Section 23(2) of the RTE Act was 
amended to ensure that all teachers acquire 
minimum qualifications prescribed under the Act 
by March 31, 2019.
To assess the performance and progress of teachers, 
the National Council of Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT) had developed performance 
indicators (PINDICS) in 2013. Fourteen states have 
adopted or adapted the PINDICS and two more 
have initiated its implementation thus far.
Teacher vacancies are also affecting the quality 
of education. Out of the total sanctioned posts 
of 51.03 lakhs, the number of working teachers 
is 42.03 lakhs, leading to vacancies of 9 lakh 
teachers in schools, of which 4.2 lakh teacher 
vacancies are in SSA schools. Thirty-three per cent 
of schools do not meet the pupil-teacher ratio. 
Ironically, despite the overall shortage of teachers, 
there are also 2.91 lakh surplus teachers across 
the country because of an imbalance in regional 
demand-supply.
4
Teacher attendance at schools is another issue 
of concern. A study shows that 25 per cent of 
teachers were absent from school, and only half 
were teaching during an unannounced visit as 
part of a national representative sample survey of 
government primary schools in India.
5 
Constraints
• There is insufficient regulatory monitoring of 
teacher education institutions.
• Teacher eligibility tests in some states may not 
be adequately robust.
• There are inadequate in-service training 
programmes as well as lack of public funding 
support.
• There is no robust system for balancing the 
demand for and supply of teachers at the 
regional or state level.
• There are limited accountability systems for 
teachers.
Way Forward
Strengthening the regulatory framework
• A committee should be set up to develop 
transparent/objective and rigorous criteria 
to recognize institutions. NCTE may assess 
institutions on these criteria and take steps to 
enforce them. 
• In addition, the accreditation system developed 
should ensure the closure of fraudulent or 
dysfunctional teacher education institutions.
• Five to six teacher training institutions of 
eminence with an annual intake of 2000 
students each need to be established.
Robust in-service teacher development
• In-service teacher professional development 
programmes should be redesigned with 
continuous progressive development through 
different modes such as early tenure coaching, 
peer-learning, resource centres, demonstration 
classes, sabbaticals for research/advanced 
studies, seminars and visits to other institutions.
• The 
Pt. Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission 
for Teachers & Teaching, which seeks to “build 
a strong professional cadre of teachers by 
setting performance standards and creating top 
123
class institutional facilities for the professional 
development of teachers”6, should be taken up 
in mission mode.
Accountability of teachers
• A national electronic teacher registry should 
be set up as part of the National Education 
Registry that has been proposed in the section 
on school education. The entire educational 
profile of each teacher aspirant may be hosted 
in one section of this registry by all teacher-
training institutions. This will be an electronic 
platform to bring together employers and job 
aspirants in this sector. All teachers should be 
listed on the National Educational Registry by 
2020, while linking students to teachers.
• Performance Indicators (PINDICS), 2013, 
and the Quality Monitoring Tools of NCERT 
should be adopted or adapted by states/UTs. 
Universal monitoring of teachers’ competencies 
should be done using PINDICS or any such 
state developed tool on an annual basis and 
uploaded on the National Electronic Teacher 
Registry. The salary increment of teachers 
should be linked to an assessment of their 
performance.
• States should test teachers tri-annually on the 
same test designed for the children they are 
teaching. It will ensure competency of teachers 
in the subjects being taught by them.
• The Teacher Eligibility Test (TET) accross states 
should be strenthened as per central TET: 
standardization of results, quality benchmarking 
of testing-items and extending the TET for 
teachers at pre-school and classes 9-12 levels. 
•  The UGC-recognised NET/SLET should be 
continued as a minimum eligibility criterion for 
recruitment to Assistant Professor positions.
States that currently do not conduct SLET should 
do so to enable availability of a larger base 
of qualified candidates for faculty positions. 
Eligibility tests should ensure quality in selection.
Tackling teacher demand-supply imbalance
• Each state must develop a teacher-demand 
forecast model for all levels, starting from 
elementary to higher education. The surplus and 
deficiency can be aggregated at the national 
level and appropriate decisions taken on whether 
to set up new training institutions or provide 
leverage to existing ones to correct overall 
deficiencies.
________________________________________
1 http://www.teindia.nic.in. Accessed April 20, 2018.
2 Gohaini, M. Record 14 per cent of aspirants clear central teachers test. TNN, Chennai. Times of India e-Newspaper. April 3, 2015.
3 UDISE (2015-16).
4 AWP&B and PAB minutes 2017-18.
5 AWP&B and PAB minutes 2017-18. 
6 Mission Statement for Pt. Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission for Teachers & Teaching.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
124
Obejctives
For harnessing the demographic advantage that 
it enjoys, India needs to build the capacity and 
infrastructure for skilling/reskilling/up-skilling 
existing and new entrants to the labour force. The 
goals to be met until 2022-23 are as follows:
• Increase the proportion of formally skilled 
labour from the current 5.4 per cent1 of India’s 
workforce to at least 15 per cent.
• Ensure inclusivity and reduce divisions based on 
gender, location, organized/unorganized, etc.
• India’s skill development infrastructure should 
be brought on par with global standards by.
o Developing internationally compliant 
National Occupation Standards (NOS) and 
the Qualification Packs (QP) that define a job 
role. 
o Making all training compliant with the 
National Skills Qualification Framework 
(NSQF). 
o Anticipating future skill needs to adapt skill 
development courses. 
• Skill development should be made an integral 
part of the secondary school curriculum. 
Current Situation 
According to the National Policy for Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship,
2  more than 
54 per cent of India’s population is below 25 years 
of age and 62 per cent of India’s population is 
aged between 15 and 59 years. This demographic 
dividend is expected to last for the next 25 years.3  
With most of the developed world experiencing 
an aging population, India has the opportunity 
to supply skilled labour globally and become the 
world’s skill capital. However, the demographic 
advantage might turn into a demographic disaster if 
the skills sets of both new entrants and the existing 
workforce do not match industry requirements. 
Recognizing the challenge, the Government of 
India has launched many initiatives to equip fresh 
entrants with relevant skills and to upgrade the 
skills of the existing workforce.
A dedicated Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) was set up in 2014 to 
implement the National Skill Development Mission, 
which envisions skilling at scale with speed and 
standards. On July 15, 2015, on the first ever World 
Youth Skills Day, the Honourable Prime Minister 
launched the Skill India scheme.
4 
To improve the relevance and quality of courses 
offered by industrial training institutes (ITIs), 
polytechnics and private training providers, 
sector skill councils (SSCs) have been involved in 
curriculum up-gradation/preparation, and in the 
assessment and certification process. Courses are 
being aligned to the National Skills Qualifications 
Framework (NSQF). Recognition of prior learning 
(RPL) has been introduced to ensure certification of 
and bridge training for the existing work force. The 
year-end review 2017 released by MSDE suggests 
that government initiatives are gathering pace. Until 
26. Skill Development

125
2017, 2.5 crore candidates have been skilled under 
the ministry’s programmes since its inception.5  
This includes 40.5 lakh candidates trained under 
the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), 
and 74 lakh candidates under fee based training 
programmes run by National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC).
6  
Constraints
The National Skill Development Policy7 estimates 
that only 5.4 per cent of the workforce in India has 
undergone formal skill training as compared to 68 
per cent in the UK, 75 per cent in Germany and 96 
per cent in South Korea. 
The India Skill Report 2018 states that only 47 per 
cent of those coming out of higher educational 
institutions are employable.8 Given that 83 per cent 
of the workforce is engaged in the unorganized 
sector with limited training facilities, upgrading of 
skills, both in manufacturing and services sectors 
remains a challenge.
The major challenges to skill development are the 
following:
• Mapping skill requirements sector-wise and 
geographically.
• Making vocational training an aspirational 
choice.
• Involving industry for improved quality and 
relevance – scaling up the apprenticeship 
programme.
• Integrating the informal sector into the skill 
development ecosystem.
• Putting in place an effective, internationally 
recognized assessment and certification system. 
Way Forward
Mapping skill requirements for a demand driven 
skill development ecosystem
• Skill development plans and strategies should 
be developed by geography and sector by 
Figure 26.1: Workforce that has undergone formal skill training
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.4% 
52.0% 
68.0% 
75.0% 
80.0% 
96.0% 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
India USA UK Germany Japan South Korea
Workers with formal skill training (%) 
Source: National Skill Development Policy
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
126
mapping the availability of infrastructure and on 
the basis of assessing skill requirements both at 
the national and state levels. Talukas/districts 
should be required to provide the information 
required for such mapping. 
• Industry stakeholders must be incentivized to 
provide data on their skill requirements on an 
ongoing basis, which could be used as input 
for the skill requirement assessment made at 
different levels. 
• Regular labour market studies should be 
conducted and published by the MSDE 
in collaboration with the SSCs. These 
studies should capture changes in industry 
requirements to assess the skill sets required 
and introduce changes in training curricula. 
• Create vocational training innovation centres for 
systematic research and conducting longitudinal 
studies on improving vocational education.  
Improving training delivery and quality
• Capacities of teacher training institutes need 
to be upgraded to ensure the availability of 
qualified trainers. It is also important to provide 
for cross learning by teachers and industry 
experts through industry-institute linkages. 
• A single regulatory body with branches in all 
states should be set up to lay down minimum 
standards for all players in the skilling system 
like training providers, assessors, etc., and to 
issue NSQF aligned certificates.
• To address the requirement of skilled workers 
in the unorganized sector, scaling up RPL 
is required under the PMKVY , using bridge 
training, apprenticeship, dual training, work-
based learning and advanced courses.  
• In addition to scaling RPL, there should be a 
focus on the identification of transferable skills. 
This can be done by developing a skills/trade 
matrix; and highlighting the overlap of skills 
across different trades, such as information and 
communication technology (ICT), knowledge of 
languages, etc. The most common transferable 
skills across the board should be made part of 
the basic skill development curriculum.
Vocational education in secondary schools
• As recommended by the Sub-Group of Chief 
Ministers on Skill Development,
9 vocational 
education may be initiated from class VIII. The 
report pointed out that lessons could be drawn 
from the “
The Himachal Pradesh Payment of 
Skill Development Allowance to Educated 
Unemployed Persons Scheme, 2013.” This has 
provided for an allowance starting from INR 
1,000 per month for students who have at least 
passed VIII standard.10  This will help children 
get acquainted with formal vocational courses 
and apprenticeship training. Provisions for 
credit transfers into higher education could also 
be considered. 
• Participation by private schools should be 
incentivized with lower interest rates on loans 
to expand training facilities.
Apprenticeship programmes
• Active advocacy is needed to create awareness 
about recent amendments in the Apprenticeship 
Act, 1961, and about the National 
Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS) 
among different stakeholders. 
• The claim process for reimbursement, through 
which companies get appropriate refund for 
funds spent on stipends under the NAPS, needs 
to be streamlined.
• Facilitate the integration of the micro, small 
& medium enterprises (MSME) sector into the 
127
apprenticeship system by linking it to MUDRA 
scheme.
Skilling 
• Mainstreaming skill development with 
education through a system for academic 
equivalence to ITI’s qualifications. This would 
provide ITI candidates option to attain academic 
qualification as well. 
• An Overseas Employment Promotion Agency 
should be set up at the national level under 
the Ministry of External Affairs. Apart from 
working with the MSDE to train and certify 
Indian workers keen on overseas employment, 
in line with international standards, it could 
also support pre-departure orientation training 
(PDOT), including language and soft skills 
training modules. This agency could help in 
identifying potential partners and streamlining 
efforts of India international skill centers.
• Publicize role models/micro entrepreneurs who 
have benefitted from vocational training courses. 
Funding
• Alternative financial sources such as Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) funds, Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority (CAMPA) funds, Building 
& Construction Workers’ Cess, Members of 
Parliament Local Area Development (MPLAD) 
Fund, Mahatama Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), 
etc., should be tapped to expand the skill 
programme and contribute to national skill 
development fund. 
Strengthening SSCs
• SSCs should be clustered and based on 
occupations/functions with respect to 
job standards/QPs across domains. New 
technologies could also be considered as a 
criterion for clustering. This would ensure 
convergence in efforts of different SSCs.
• It is recommended that job roles of SSCs having 
horizontal applicability across sectors should 
be integrated and customized to a sector’s 
requirements.
11 
Monitoring and evaluation
• Since skilling is dynamic, it is necessary to 
monitor programmes regularly. Hence, it is 
necessary to develop state level indicators, 
such as placement rates, which help 
monitoring whether demand requirements are 
being addressed, and the impact of various 
government schemes. 
• NSDC may get into partnerships with private 
jobs counseling agencies for helping newly 
skilled persons with soft skills and adapting to 
local conditions.
________________________________________
1 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF .TOTL.IN?locations=IN&view=chart. Accessed May 03, 2018. 
2 National Skill Development Policy, 2015 – Page 55.
3 http://www.msde.gov.in/assets/images/Skill%20India/policy%20booklet-%20Final.pdf. Accessed May 03, 2018.
4 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=123296. Accessed May 03, 2018.
5 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=175282. Accessed May 06, 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
128
6 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=175282. Accessed May 03, 2018.
7 National Skill Development Policy 2015 – framework document.
8 India Skill Report 2018.
9 http://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Final%20report%20%20of%20Sub-Group%20Report%20on%20Skill%20Development.pdf. 
Accessed May 03, 2018.
10 http://himachal.nic.in/showfile.php?lang=1&dpt_id=14&level=2&lid=4282&sublinkid=14849. Accessed May 07, 2018.
11 One such example is Management and Entrepreneurship and Professional Skills Council (MEPSC).
129
Objectives
To revamp radically the public and preventive health 
system in the nation through the following strategic 
interventions:
• Mobilize public health action through an 
integrated, inter-sectoral and pan-stakeholder 
approach, targeted at communities and 
individuals as well as grassroots organizations, 
aimed at creating an unprecedented people-led 
movement for health and wellness.
• Operationalize vital enablers - a) public 
health and management cadre, b) public 
health agency with capacitated supporting 
institutions (c) municipalities and 
panchayati raj 
institutions.
Current Situation
Public health, i.e., the science of keeping 
communities healthy through the prevention of 
disease and promotion of health and wellness, 
has historically been a low priority in India. Of the 
total current expenditure on health classified by 
healthcare functions, preventive care accounts for 
6.7 per cent. The money spent on curing people on 
the other hand is 51 per cent of the expenditure
1 
with the remaining money being spent on 
pharmaceuticals, other medical goods and patient 
transportation.
Although India accounted for only 18 per cent of the 
global population in 2016, we accounted for 34 per 
cent of the global tuberculosis burden and 26 per 
cent of the premature mortality due to diarrhoea, 
lower respiratory and other common infectious 
diseases.
2 At the same time, non-communicable 
diseases (NCDs), including cardiovascular 
conditions, chronic obstructive respiratory diseases, 
diabetes, mental health conditions and cancers 
are now the leading cause of health loss, with 
55 per cent morbidity and premature mortality 
attributable to these conditions. The range of health 
loss
3  across states is wide. Kerala and Goa have 
the lowest rates while Assam, Uttar Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh have the highest rates.4 
Public health action and management is a scientific 
and professional endeavour which should not be 
left to untrained employees relying on common 
sense alone. 
A suboptimal public health system:
• Makes it challenging to tackle NCDs, which, in 
the first place, is all about prevention and early 
detection. 
• Causes us to resort to high-cost secondary and 
tertiary health care in many cases.
• Diminishes our preparedness for new and 
emerging threats such as bioterrorism.
• Compromises our ability to harness the 
demographic dividend.
The nations with whom we compete or aspire 
to emulate have achieved health and wellness 
outcomes on the foundation of strong public 
27. Public Health Management  
and Action

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
130
health systems. Thus, it is an absolutely essential 
ingredient for building a New India. 
During the last four years, the government has 
taken several steps to strengthen public health 
in the country including the launch of Mission 
Indradhanush and Intensified Mission Indradhanush 
as well as the National AYUSH Mission. Efforts have 
also been intensified for eliminating Neglected 
Tropical Diseases like 
Kala Azar and Lymphatic 
Filariasis. Further, the war against Tuberculosis has 
been escalated through the launch of the National 
Strategic Plan in 2017.
Constraints
1. Diseases need to be prevented first, a concept 
that has historically been inadequately 
acknowledged in India. The large burden of 
NCDs requires lifestyle and community-level 
interventions. Ensuring people eat right, 
sleep right, maintain good hygiene, exercise, 
and adopt a healthy lifestyle necessitates 
concerted interventions at various levels of the 
system.
2. In most states, population health management 
positions are staffed by doctors, trained 
primarily in the provision of curative services, 
or by generalist civil servants. They have 
limited public health training, which includes 
an understanding of the causes and linkages 
between risk factors and diseases as well 
Figure 27.1: Preventable risk factors are the biggest contributors to the disease 
burden, 2016
 
14.6%
9.8%
8.9%
8.5%
6.0%
5.9%
4.6%
4.1%
3.6%
3.6%
3.0%
2.8%
1.1%
1.0%
0.9%
0.6%
0.3%
0.0% 2.0% 4.0% 6.0% 8.0% 10.0% 12.0% 14.0% 16.0%
Malnutrition
Air Pollution
Dietary Risks
High Blood Pressure
High Fasting Plasma Glucose
Tobacco Use
WASH
High Total Cholesterol
High Body Mass Index
Alcohol & Drug Use
Occupational Risks
Impaired Kidney Function
Unsafe Sex
Other Environmental Causes
Low Physical Activity
Low Bone Mineral Density
Sexual Abuse & Violence
Contribution of Risk Factors to Disease 
Burden (%)
Source: India: Health of the Nation’s States, 20175 ; Disease burden measured in terms of Disability Adjusted Life Years
131
as disciplines including epidemiology, 
biostatistics, social and behavioural sciences 
and management of health services. Likewise, 
hospitals are run by clinicians with little 
expertise in managing health facilities. 
3. The following preventable risk factors are 
causes for a major proportion of diseases in the 
country: maternal and child malnutrition, air 
pollution, unhealthy diets, high blood pressure, 
high blood glucose, tobacco consumption, 
unsafe water, and poor sanitary practices; 
of these, nutrition, environment, water and 
sanitation are outside the purview of the health 
ministry. Therefore, accountability for ensuring 
vital public health actions is spread thin.  
4. There is no single authority responsible for 
public health that is legally empowered 
to enforce compliance from other public 
authorities and citizens, even though several 
factors may require inter-sectoral action to 
achieve a measurable impact on population 
health.
Way Forward
1. Mobilize public health action at multiple 
levels
• Public funding on health should be increased to 
at least 2.5 per cent of GDP as envisaged in the 
National Health Policy, 2017.
• Create an environment, through appropriate 
policy measures, that encourages healthy 
choices and behaviours:
o Make the practice of yoga a regular activity 
in all schools through certified instructors.
o Increase taxes on tobacco, alcohol and 
unhealthy foods such as soda and sugar 
sweetened beverages.
o Co-locate AYUSH services in at least 50 per 
cent of primary health centres, 70 per cent 
of community health centres and 100 per 
cent of district hospitals by 2022-23.
6 
• Strengthen the Village Health Sanitation and 
Nutrition Day platform to cover a broader set of 
health issues across various population groups 
instead of only focusing on child health.
• Activate multiple channels (schools, colleges, 
women’s groups, traditional events like fairs, 
social media platforms, National Cadet Corps 
etc.) and prepare communication materials for 
catalysing behavioural change towards greater 
recognition of preventive health care. 
• Make nutrition, water and sanitation part of the 
core functions of
 panchayati raj institutions and 
municipalities.
2. Institute a public health and management 
cadre in states
Incentivize state governments to invest in creating 
a dedicated cadre for public health at the state, 
district and block levels:
• Characteristics of the cadre
o Train officials in public health related 
disciplines including epidemiology, 
biostatistics, demography and social and 
behavioural sciences.
o Provide training in hospital management 
to suitably equip personnel responsible for 
managing large facilities. 
o Create a career pathway up to the highest 
levels within the state health departments 
for those trained in public health, as well 
as for those with clinical specialties.
o Allow mid-level providers responsible for 
managing health and wellness centres 
delivering comprehensive primary 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
132
healthcare to rise to higher-level positions 
within the cadre. Similarly, allow public 
health functionaries at the block and 
district levels to enter the cadre.
o Mandate a master’s level qualification, in 
addition to specified training, for officials 
taking on leadership positions. 
• Institutional mechanisms
o  Develop a model public health and 
management cadre by drawing upon best 
practices and engage with states to adapt, 
refine and institutionalize the model.
o  Formulate guidelines to create the cadre, 
primarily by re-aligning the requisite skill 
sets of existing functionaries with service 
conditions.
3. Create a focal point for public health at the 
central level with state counterparts
• Create a designated and autonomous 
focal agency with the required capacities 
and linkages to perform the functions 
of disease surveillance, information 
gathering on the health impact of 
policies of key non-health departments, 
maintenance of national health statistics, 
enforcement of public health regulations, 
and dissemination of information to the 
public. An appropriately empowered and 
capacitated National Centre for Disease 
Control may be considered to play this role 
with support from relevant organizations. 
• Create a counterpart Public Health Agency 
in each state, where they do not already 
exist.  
4. Miscellaneous
• Explore the need for a Public Health Act to 
legislatively empower and, if necessary, 
institutionalise the Public Health Agency 
discussed above. 
• Redefine the role of the technical 
directorate (Directorate General of Health 
Services) and create a Directorate of Public 
Health.
•  Develop a comprehensive MIS including 
baseline data for NCDs.
________________________________________
1 National Health Accounts 2014-15, MoHFW.
2 Global Burden of Disease 2016, Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation.
3 Health loss is measured in disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). One DALY represents the loss of one year lived in full health.
4 Indian Council of Medical Research, Public Health Foundation of India, and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. GBD India 
Compare Data Visualization. New Delhi: ICMR, PHFI, and IHME; 2017. Available from http://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare/
india. Accessed November 19, 2017.
5 Published by the Indian Council of Medical Research, Public Health Foundation of India and the Institute for Health Metrics and 
Evaluation.
6 The NITI Aayog’s three-year Action Agenda had recommended that the co-location AYUSH services should be ensured in 50 per cent 
of primary health centres (PHCs), 60 per cent of community health centres (CHCs) and 100 per cent of district hospitals by 2020. Until 
the end of the 12th Five-Year Plan period, AYUSH facilities had been co-located in 37 per cent of PHCs, 50 per cent of CHCs and 63 
per cent of district hospitals.
133
Objectives
Under Ayushman Bharat, scale-up a new vision 
for comprehensive primary health care across 
the country, built on the platform of health and 
wellness centres (HWCs), to:
• Provide quality ambulatory services for an 
inclusive package of diagnostic, curative, 
rehabilitative and palliative care, close to the 
people.
• Deliver preventive and promotion services, and 
action on the ground to tackle determinants of 
ill health locally.
• Create a mass movement for Healthy India 
(
Swasth Bharat Jan Andolan).
Current Situation
Primary health care is a key enabler for higher life 
expectancy, better health outcomes and lower costs 
for the nation. Primary health interventions help 
detect diseases early, well before complications set 
in, thus pre-empting the need for secondary and 
tertiary care.
Developed nations such as the UK, Australia, 
Canada, Netherlands and Sweden spend a large 
share of their federal healthcare budgets on primary 
care.
1 In India, primary care infrastructure exists as a 
network of sub-centres, primary health centres and 
community health centres. However, the focus of 
services has remained narrow – largely prioritized 
around reproductive, maternal and child healthcare, 
and some communicable diseases (notably, 
malaria). The battle against non-communicable 
diseases can only be won through a primary health 
system that ensures that chronic diseases are not 
only detected early, but also that preventive action 
is taken to ensure improved lifestyles. 
The National Health Policy (NHP), 2017, envisages 
comprehensive primary health care delivered 
through HWCs. The policy also commits that 
two-thirds or more of government spending 
will be targeted at primary care. Additionally, 
the announcement of 
Ayushman Bharat by the 
government is a game changer.
Constraints
1. The existing primary health care model in the 
country is limited in scope. Even where there 
is a well-functioning public primary health 
centre, only services related to pregnancy care, 
limited childcare and certain services related 
to national health programmes are provided, 
which represent only 15 per cent of all 
morbidities for which people seek care.
2 
2. The conversion of 150,000 sub centres into 
HWCs was announced in the budget speech 
in 2017 and was enshrined in the NHP , 2017. 
Although less than 4000 such centres were 
sanctioned in 2017-18, the government 
is committed to accelerating the pace of 
sanctioning and putting up HWCs to meet the 
target in good time.
28. Comprehensive Primary Health Care

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
134
3. Supply side deficiencies, poor management 
skills and lack of appropriate training and 
supportive supervision for health workers 
prevent delivery of the desired quality of health 
services.
4. A primary health care model for the growing 
urban population has not been conceptualized, 
notwithstanding a few assorted initiatives by 
some states.
5. Although the National Health Mission focuses 
on engaging communities through village 
health, nutrition and sanitation societies, health 
has not yet become a people’s movement.
6. Funding for health is inadequate, leading to 
low spending on primary care.
7. Citizens have to incur high out-of-pocket 
expenditure on primary health care, of which 
the largest expenditure is on drugs.
8. There is a shortage of adequately trained and 
motivated personnel. 
Way Forward
1. Accelerate the establishment of a network of 
150,000 HWCs 
• Operationalize a network of 150,000 HWCs on 
priority by 2022-23 in order to ensure sufficient 
coverage of affordable primary care and lower 
the burden on secondary and tertiary care.
• HWCs should provide services such as 
screening and management of non-
communicable diseases; screening and basic 
management of mental health ailments; care 
for common ophthalmic and ENT problems; 
basic dental health care; geriatric and palliative 
health care, and trauma care and emergency 
care. 
Figure 28.1: Additional services to be provided under the New India  
primary care system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Based on the ‘Report of the Task Force on Comprehensive Primary Health Care’, MoHFW 2016
135
• These are in addition to the existing 
requirement for primary care services related 
to reproductive and child health, adolescent 
health, and selected communicable diseases 
covered by national health programmes.
• The key features of New India’s primary health 
care system will be:
o A primary health care nucleus comprising 
five to six upgraded sub-centres coupled 
with a primary health centre, and 
population outreach.
o A team led by a mid-level health service 
provider,3  auxiliary nurse midwives (ANMs), 
accredited social health activists (ASHAs) 
and a male health worker responsible for 
comprehensive primary health care services 
for a population of about 5,000.
o Planning of health facility distribution in 
districts to ensure that a continuum of care 
is available on the principles of ‘time to 
care’ through a strong referral linkage.
o Digitization of family records and 
information from the community to the 
facility level.
o Use of real-time data to guide public health 
action and implementation monitoring.
o The HWCs would act as the ‘gateway’ for 
access to secondary and tertiary health 
services.
2. Enable mechanisms for rapid scale up
• Put in place the following work streams to 
create 150,000 well-functioning HWCs across 
the country – infrastructure; human resources 
(mid-level professional recruitment, training 
Figure 28.2: Revamped primary health system for New India 
 Use of real -time data to guide public health action and implementation 
monitoring 
 The HWCs would act as the ‘gateway’ for access to secondary and tertiary 
health services 
 
2. Co-ordinate action for disease prevention and public health promotion  and to 
address social determinants of health 
 Provide preventive  services to improve healthy behaviours for family health and  
control the incidence of communicable and non -communicable diseases among the 
population covered by HWCs. 
 Facilitate partnerships between HWC teams and other frontline development teams 
(nutrition, education, Swachh Bharat etc.) to engage with communities to address 
the socio-cultural and environmental determinants of ill health at the local level. 
Figure 2: Revamped Primary Health System for New India  
 
Source: School of Planning & Architecture, Delhi 
 
3. Catalyse people’s participation for healthy India: Swasth Bharat Jan Andolan 
 Mandate and motivate HWC teams to work closely with village health, sanitation 
and nutrition societies, panchayati raj institutions as well as all other constituents of 
civil society in rural and urban space s. This is vital because p eople are not just 
targets of health services but partners and multipliers of health-related activities. 
 
4. Enable mechanisms for rapid scale up 
 Put in place the following work streams to create  150,000 well-functioning HWCs 
across the country – infrastructure; human resources (mid -level professional 
recruitment, training and deployment; deployment and orientation of ANMs and 
male health workers); an Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
Source: School of Planning & Architecture, Delhi
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
136
and deployment; deployment and orientation 
of ANMs and male health workers); an Infor-
mation and Communication Technology (ICT) 
system; supply chain for drugs and disposables; 
clinical and public health protocols and tools; 
managerial/supervisory processes, and monitor-
ing, evaluation and accountability systems. 
• Under
 Ayushman Bharat, put in place the 
necessary institutional mechanisms with a 
focus on health and wellness at the central 
and state levels for effective, timely and robust 
system level implementation as well as strong 
engagement with departments/directorates of 
health in the states.
• Establish special national and state level task 
forces and ‘command centres’.
• Create mechanisms for rapid scaling up of 
training. 
• Develop empowered governance mechanisms 
for efficient decision-making, coordination, 
funds flow, procurement, contracting, 
recruitment, construction and implementation. 
• Mobilize Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
and Non-Resident Indians for funding HWCs. 
• Some HWCs could also be mobile, particularly 
for better access to remote communities.
3. Coordinate action for disease prevention and 
public health promotion and to address social 
determinants of health
• Provide preventive services to improve healthy 
behaviours for family health and control 
the incidence of communicable and non-
communicable diseases among the population 
covered by HWCs.
• Facilitate partnerships between HWC teams and 
other frontline development teams (nutrition, 
education, 
Swachh Bharat etc.) to engage with 
communities to address the socio-cultural and 
environmental determinants of ill health at the 
local level.
4. Catalyse people’s participation for healthy 
India:
 Swasth Bharat Jan Andolan
• Mandate and motivate HWC teams to work 
closely with village health, sanitation and nutrition 
societies, 
panchayati raj institutions as well as 
all other constituents of civil society in rural and 
urban spaces. This is vital because people are not 
just targets of health services but partners and 
multipliers of health-related activities.
5. Emphasise concurrent learning, operations 
research and innovation 
• Undertake a well-funded research programme 
to find the best pathways for effective and 
context-specific scaling up of primary health 
care. This is critical because it is well-known 
that a single model of primary health care may 
not work for all districts/states in the country.
• Conduct research to assess the population-level 
health impact of the programme and effects on 
out-of-pocket expenses.
• Develop urban adaptations of comprehensive 
primary care.
________________________________________
1 Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare: Report of the Task Force on Comprehensive Primary Health Care Rollout, 
2016.
2 Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare: Report of the Task Force on Comprehensive Primary Health Care Rollout, 
2016.
3 With a degree in nursing, AYUSH or community health, and with required training in public health and primary care.
137
Objectives
• Achieve a doctor-population ratio of at least 
1:1400 (WHO norm 1:1000) and nurse-
population ratio of at least 1:500 (WHO norm 
1:400) by 2022-23. 
• Ensure availability of paramedics and doctors 
as per Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS) 
norms in high priority districts by 2020 
(National Health Policy, 2017).
• Deploy mid-level providers (MLPs) to manage 
the primary healthcare system.
• Generate at least 1.5 million jobs in the 
public health sector by 2022-23, a large 
number of which will employ women. 
Current Situation
India’s health workforce is characterised by a 
diversity of providers delivering services in allopathy 
and alternative systems of medicine like ayurveda, 
homeopathy, unani and siddha.
As of March 2017, there were 10.23 lakh 
allopathic doctors registered with the Medical 
Council of India or state medical councils. 
Assuming 80 per cent availability, it is estimated 
that around 8.18 lakh doctors may actually be 
available for active service. This gives a doctor-
population ratio of 1:1613.
The current nurse-population ratio is 1:588.
1 Due 
to the suboptimal quality of training offered by 
several institutions that have mushroomed over 
the years, limited career prospects and poor 
working conditions, especially in the private sector, 
there is a significant shortage of skilled nurses in 
the country.    
Moreover, the distribution of doctors and nurses 
across the country is uneven. Urban areas have four 
times as many doctors and three times as many 
nurses as compared to rural areas. Medical and 
nursing colleges are concentrated in a few states, 
e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Gujarat and Maharashtra. 
There are also severe shortages in the category 
of allied health professionals (AHPs) including 
medical lab technicians, optometrists and 
radiologists. For instance, as of March 31, 2016, 
there was a shortfall
2 of 13,659 lab technicians 
at primary health centres (PHCs) and community 
health centres (CHCs) across India. Similarly, there 
was a shortfall of 3645 radiographers at CHCs. The 
absence of a central regulatory authority for AHPs 
has resulted in the mushrooming of institutes/
colleges without affiliation or recognition, giving 
rise to quality issues for this category of health 
professionals as well. 
As far as specialists are concerned, a large number 
of posts are vacant all over the country. According 
to estimates, India needs close to 0.5 million 
additional specialists. 
Ayushman Bharat has 
triggered the need for even more human resources 
for health (HRH). There is also an acute shortage of 
medical faculty. Of the 1,830 faculty posts across 
29. Human Resources for Health
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
138
Figure 29.1: Shortfall of specialists in government health centres compared to 
the requirement based on existing infrastructure 
Figure 29.2: Sanctioned posts of specialists vacant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83.4 
76.3 
83 
82.1 
81.2 
84 
76.7 
83.2 
80.1 
81 
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
Surgeons Obstetricians &
Gynaecologists
Physicians Paediatricians Total
Specialists (%) 
2015 2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74.6 
65.4 68.1 
63.6 
67.6 68.2 
61.9 
70.2 
62.8 65.3 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Surgeons Obstetricians &
Gynaecologists
Physicians Paediatricians Total
Sanctioned Posts of Specialists Vacant (%) 
2015 2016
Source: Rural Health Statistics, 2016
Source: Rural Health Statistics, 2016
139
six All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
approximately 583 (31 per cent) had been filled up 
until July 2017. 
The government has made several efforts to address 
the shortage and quality of HRH in the country. 
These include the passage of the National Medical 
Commission (NMC) Bill, 2017 by the Union Cabinet, 
addition of 15,364 undergraduate and 9,855 
postgraduate seats in medical colleges as well as 
increasing the superannuation age of doctors to 65 
years in the Central Health Service, among other 
measures. Steps have also been taken to address 
the shortage of specialists through the system 
of diplomas from the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons (CPS), for instance.
Constraints
• The regulatory system (Medical Council of 
India, Nursing Council of India) has failed to 
ensure adequate availability and quality of 
health professionals.
• There is inadequate capacity to train doctors, 
especially specialists and super-specialists.
• Private practice by medial faculty in teaching 
institutions is rampant in several states, 
compromising on the commitment to teaching 
and institutional clinical work.
• Many state and private medical/nursing/dental 
colleges have poor infrastructure.
• There is no comprehensive and consistent HRH 
policy.
• Workforce shortages and uneven distribution 
of doctors, nurses, specialists and allied health 
professionals plague the sector.
• The quality of health professional training 
and adherence to standards is sub-optimal, 
including in the private sector. 
• Health professionals in the public sector are 
inadequately compensated and motivation 
levels are extremely poor. Fair compensation 
in the private sector, e.g., for nurses, is also a 
challenge.
• There is paucity of data on HRH in the country.
Way Forward
1. Reform the governance of medical, nursing, 
dentistry and pharmacy education in the 
country
• Enact the NMC Bill, 2017. 
• Revamp the AYUSH, nursing, dentistry and 
pharmacy councils along the lines of the NMC 
Bill, 2017. 
• Establish a Council for Allied Health 
Professionals to ensure standardization of 
education and putting in place quality control 
mechanisms for educational institutions, 
teaching methods, clinical protocols and 
workforce management. 
• Put in place an updated curriculum for medical 
and allied professions that keeps pace with the 
changing dynamics of public health, policy and 
demographics. 
• Establish a nursing school in every large district 
or cluster of districts with a population of 
20-30 lakhs as per the National Health Policy, 
2017. 
• Take steps to revamp the regulatory system of 
nursing education, ensure quality training in 
nursing schools, develop specialties in nursing, 
develop centres of excellence in nursing and 
enhance the stature of government nurses. 
• Take steps to stop private practice by faculty of 
government teaching institutions by providing 
attractive salaries and incentives.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
140
2. Enhance production of doctors (especially 
specialists and super- specialists)
• While some steps have been taken, the system 
of Diplomate of National Board (DNB) and 
Diplomas from CPS, may be expanded. This 
will help to address the shortage of specialists 
in the country.
• Link at least 40 per cent of district hospitals 
with medical colleges.
3 
• Meet faculty shortages in new AIIMS with an 
active search strategy, visiting/adjunct faculty 
system (from India and abroad), and other 
methods.
• Create pathways for training of doctors in 
specialties and super-specialties at private 
hospitals (certification, short courses, exchange 
programmes, etc.)
• Utilize extensively and incentivize district 
hospitals for formal (DNB/CPS diploma) and 
informal specialty training of doctors and nurses.
• Provide opportunities for training in 
specialized/cutting edge areas at the best 
centres in the world for faculty of national 
institutions of excellence (NIEs) (AIIMS, 
PGIMER, JIPMER, NIMHANS) and of state 
medical colleges of repute.
• Create conditions to facilitate the import of 
doctors, especially those of Indian origin, 
working abroad.
• Consider deploying teachers from universities 
abroad as visiting professors at AIIMS/NIEs.
• An enabling framework for deployment of 
doctors and specialists from the private sector 
to government hospitals on a visiting/honorary 
basis may be developed and piloted. 
3. Develop a comprehensive HRH policy in 
states
• To enable the formulation of a comprehensive 
HRH policy in states for all categories, develop 
a model policy covering issues pertaining 
to staff recruitment, retention, transfer, 
incentive structures for posting in difficult 
areas including access to housing facilities, 
performance management and competency-
based career tracks for professional 
advancement.
4. Skill and deploy non-physicians and other 
health providers
• Develop plans for training a full range of allied 
health professionals such that it meets national 
requirements as well as creates a surplus for 
placements abroad. 
• Create a cadre of primary healthcare 
practitioners by introducing a three-year 
competency-based dynamic course for primary, 
community and family medicine.
• Place 150,000 skilled and independently 
certified MLPs to manage the health and 
wellness centres to be operationalized over the 
next five years.
• Explore some specific task shifting 
opportunities like developing a cadre of 
nursing practitioners and physician assistants. 
5. Generate data on HRH, track progress
• Generate comprehensive real-time data on 
forecasting, production capacity and skill mix 
as well as generate trends with respect to the 
key categories of HRH in the country. 
• By 2019, put in place a system for tracking 
progress against the stipulated HRH 
requirements.
141
• Ensure meeting country commitments and 
targets under the Global Strategy on HRH.4 
6. Engage private sector for skilling and 
training HRH
• Establish partnerships with medical device 
manufacturers as part of the Skill India and 
Make in India programmes to identify skill gaps 
and design appropriate curricula for training 
programmes.
• Partner with private hospitals/private medical 
practitioners to skill technicians, nursing 
and para-nursing as well as para-medical 
staff under the National Skill Development 
Corporation’s Healthcare Sector Skill Council.
________________________________________
1 Nursing Council of India.
2 Rural Health Statistics, 2016.
3 NITI Aayog 3-year Action Agenda states that up to 20 per cent of district hospitals must be linked with medical colleges by 2020.
4 Global strategy on human resources for health: Workforce 2030, World Health Organization.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
142
Objectives
On the strong platform of Pradhan Mantri - Jan 
Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY): 
• Attain a coverage of at least 75 per cent of 
the population with publicly financed health 
insurance (covering most secondary and tertiary 
care procedures) by 2022-23.
• Reduce by 50 per cent the proportion of 
households facing catastrophic health 
expenditure from the current levels.1 
Current Situation
There have been noteworthy strides over the 
past two decades in the quality of health care 
delivered to citizens and population health 
outcomes. Yet, there is wide variation across states 
in the availability of resources, the status of state 
health programmes, rural-urban differentials and 
governance capacity.
Public health infrastructure in the country expanded 
considerably following the launch of the National 
Health Mission in 2005; however, there continues to 
be a shortfall in several areas. In 2015, the number of 
sub-centres (SCs) fell short of requirements by 20 per 
cent, of primary health centres (PHCs) by 22 per cent 
and of community health centres (CHCs) by 32 per 
cent in rural India. The quality of public sector health 
facilities has also suffered because of shortage of 
personnel and lack of necessary supplies. 
Data from the National Sample Survey Organisation’s 
71st Round (January-June 2014) shows that only 
28 per cent and 21 per cent of patients in rural and 
urban areas respectively use the outpatient care 
provided by health facilities in the public sector. The 
corresponding figures for the usage of in-patient care 
are 42 per cent and 32 per cent. The mixed health 
system, therefore, remains largely dominated by 
the private sector, which provides services at widely 
varying costs and quality levels. 
Public funding of health has been consistently low 
in India (approximately 1.3 per cent of GDP). As a 
result, out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE) is 62 per 
cent of the total expenditure on health. In 2007, 
the central government launched the 
Rashtriya 
Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) to cover hospital 
expenses of up to INR 30,000 for a family of five 
members living below the poverty line. Evaluation 
studies for RSBY have shown that while it did 
increase access to health care as well as non-
medical health spending for the poor, it did not 
provide significant financial protection, perhaps due 
to the exclusion of spending on outpatient care, 
drugs and diagnostics. 
The decision to launch PM-JAY under 
Ayushman 
Bharat is a path breaking step towards Universal 
Health Coverage. It aims to cover 10.74 crore 
families at the bottom two quintiles with INR 5 
lakh cover each year for secondary and tertiary care 
hospitalization. The PM-JAY will be implemented in 
alliance with state government schemes.
As per the NSSO 71st Round, out of the total OOPE, 
63.5 per cent is on outpatient care. Of this, the 
largest expenditure (71 per cent) is on medicines. 
30. Universal Health Coverage

143
It is paradoxical that although India is one of the 
largest suppliers of generic drugs to the world, a 
significant proportion of the country’s population 
lacks access to essential medicines.
During the last four years, however, the government 
has taken significant steps to enhance access 
to medicines especially for the poor and middle 
classes. The prices 958 drugs have been capped 
along with the prices of cardiac stents and knee 
implants. The 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi 
Pariyojana has been expanded from 99 functional 
stores in May, 2014 to 4,024 functional stores in 
September, 2018.
Constraints
1. There has been inadequate focus on 
comprehensive preventive care and primary 
care in the past.
2. The multiplicity of government-sponsored 
insurance schemes has resulted in the 
fragmentation of the risk pool. A sizeable risk 
pool comprising low- and high-risk individuals 
is imperative to ensure the viability and 
sustainability of insurance.
3. Since outpatient care, drugs and diagnostics 
are not covered under several government 
insurance schemes, people often delay seeking 
care until they are severely ill.
4. The coverage ceiling of RSBY is inadequate. 
5. There is an acute shortage of motivated human 
resources for health, attributable at least 
partly to the poor incentives for government 
providers. 
6. Access to drugs and medical devices at 
affordable prices is an essential ingredient 
of Universal Health Coverage. According to 
estimates by the Central Drugs and Standards 
Control Organization, around 84 per cent of 
the active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) 
for drugs manufactured in India are imported. 
This dependence on import of APIs has gone up 
more than fourfold between 2004 and 2013.
7. While the notification of medical devices 
rules is an important step, a clearly defined 
and comprehensive regulatory framework is 
required. Additionally, approximately 75 per 
cent of the current demand for devices is met 
through imports. 
Figure 30.1: Pillars of universal health coverage 
 

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
144
8. The prices of diagnostic tests can vary widely 
across the country. For example, a lipid profile 
test can cost Rs. 90 in some cities, going up to 
Rs. 7,110 in others. 
Way Forward
Recommendations pertaining to comprehensive 
primary healthcare, public health action and human 
resources for health are covered in other chapters of 
this document. Other strategies for overcoming the 
constraints listed are described below.
1. Roll out PM-JAY 
• Establish the 
Ayushman Bharat-National Health 
Agency at the central level and counterpart 
institutions at the state and district levels for 
management of the PM-JAY .
• Develop a robust, modular, scalable and 
interoperable IT platform as per standards 
formulated by the National Digital Health 
Authority to enable paperless and cashless 
transactions under the scheme.
• Put in place mechanisms for fraud prevention, 
detection and control as well as for grievance 
redressal.
• Design a comprehensive media and outreach 
strategy to increase awareness of the scheme 
among intended beneficiaries and other 
stakeholders.
• Institutionalise health technology assessment 
at the central and state levels to determine the 
service packages to be covered under PM-JAY 
in the future. 
• Develop costing frameworks for determining 
accurate package rates for procedures. 
• Develop standard treatment guidelines for 
priority conditions.
• Monitoring, evaluation and research
o  Put in place data analytics systems to guide 
strategic purchasing
2  of health services, 
forecasting and generating policy inputs.
o  Institutionalize a mechanism for 
undertaking independent audits of the 
scheme.
o  Conduct research on the population-
level impact of the programme including 
financial protection, healthcare access and 
health outcomes. 
2. Galvanize health facilities in the public 
sector and engage the private sector
• Provide greater autonomy to public hospitals 
to use claims money generated under PM-JAY 
to improve facilities, purchase the necessary 
drugs/tests and provide performance-based 
incentives to staff.
• Strengthen district hospitals to conform to the 
Indian Public Health Standards.
• Institutionalize ranking of district hospitals 
based on their performance on health indicators 
to foster competition and nudge them towards 
quality improvement.
• Introduce appropriate gate-keeping 
mechanisms for adoption by the proposed 
health and wellness centres. 
• Reform the compensation system for 
professionals in public sector health facilities 
by shifting to a blended capitation mode of 
payment (part salary and part incentive based 
on achieving pre-agreed outcomes).
• Trigger private investments in rural/supply 
deficit areas by providing appropriate incentives 
for empanelling hospitals.
145
3. Ensure access to affordable drugs and 
medical devices 
• Institute a new Drug Price Control Order 
(DPCO), which ensures rational drug prices by 
reducing trade margins. 
• Include consumables, in addition to drugs, in 
the DPCO to control undue profiteering. 
• Finalize the national pharmaceutical policy to 
enable access to affordable medicines, promote 
the use of generic drugs, clamp down on 
unfair marketing practices and give a boost to 
local manufacturing to reduce dependence on 
imports.
• Formulate and implement the e-pharmacy 
policy to facilitate online access to quality 
medicines in a cost-effective and timely manner.
• Review and iron out the challenges with the 
business model of 
Jan Aushadhi stores to 
ensure that they can function as self-sustaining 
entities and scale up rapidly across the country.
• Find the best pathways for scaling up and 
adapting the process of bulk procurement of 
drugs adopted in states like Tamil Nadu and 
Rajasthan. 
• Boost domestic production of APIs by setting 
up six large API intermediate clusters as per the 
recommendations of the Katoch Committee. 
• Streamline regulatory processes including 
providing a single window clearance 
mechanism to manufacturers. 
• Introduce a separate Act for medical devices 
as per global best practises, so that medical 
devices are regulated separately from 
pharmaceuticals.
• Formulate an appropriate pricing policy for 
medical devices and re-examine it periodically  
to ensure access to affordable devices for the 
population while also ensuring a sufficient 
return on investment.
• Develop the National List of Essential Medical 
Devices along the lines of the National List of 
Essential Medicines to improve patient care, 
increase the affordability of tests, improve the 
regulation and quality of diagnostic tests, and 
promote the rational use of diagnostics.
4. Strengthen health research capacity
• Set up research consortia for diseases of high 
priority including neglected tropical diseases 
and emerging infections along the lines of 
the India TB Research and Development 
Corporation. 
• Identify at least 20 academic or research 
institutions at the regional level to act as hubs 
capable of training a minimum of 500 doctors 
every year.
• Ensure the presence of at least one model rural 
health research unit in every state. 
• Cover the entire country with a network of viral 
research and diagnostic laboratories with a 
testing capacity of more than 15 lakh samples 
per year. 
• Identify key research areas in traditional 
medicine and facilitate collaborative research 
with modern systems of medicine. 
________________________________________
1 It is proposed that the achievement of this target be advanced to 2022 instead of 2025 as stated in the National Health Policy, 2017.
2 Strategic purchasing means active, evidence-based engagement in defining the service-mix and volume and selecting the provid-
er-mix in order to maximize societal objectives.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
146
Objectives
Under POSHAN Abhiyaan, achieve the following 
outcomes by 2022-23, compared to the baseline of 
2015-16 (National Family Health Survey-4):
• Reduce the prevalence of stunting among 
children to 25 per cent or less. 
• Reduce the prevalence of underweight in 
children (0-6 years) to 25 per cent or less.
• Reduce the prevalence of anaemia among young 
children (6-59 months) to 43 per cent or less. 
• Reduce the prevalence of anaemia among 
adolescent girls and women (15-49 years) to 38 
per cent or less.
Current Situation
Under-nutrition is the prime risk factor in over 40 
per cent of under-five child deaths. Children with 
under-nutrition, anaemia and iodine deficiency 
will have low IQ scores and productivity as adults.  
A World Bank estimate1  indicates that reducing 
stunting can raise India’s GDP by 4-11 per cent. The 
prevalence of stunting declines by an estimated 3.2 
per cent for every 10 per cent increase in income 
per capita. Similarly, a 10 per cent rise in income per 
capita translates into a 7.4 per cent fall in wasting. 
Thus, increasing per capita incomes through rapid 
and equitable economic growth is a necessary 
condition for improving nutrition outcomes.
31. Nutrition
Figure 31.1: Key nutritional indicators in India
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Stunting Underweight Children (6-59
months) who are
anaemic
All women (15-49
years) who are
anaemic
48 
42.5 
69.4 
55.3 
38.4 35.7 
58.4 
53 
Nutritional Status  (%) 
NFHS-3 NFHS-4
Source: NFHS 3 (2005-06) & NFHS 4 (2015-16) 

147
Although progress has been made, according to 
National Family Health Survey-4 (NFHS-4), 2015-16, 
over one-third of all under-five children are stunted 
(low height-for-age), every fifth child is wasted (low 
weight-for-height), and more than 50 per cent of 
the children are anaemic.
Other emerging economies such as Brazil (stunting 
– 6.1 per cent, wasting – 1.6 per cent), China 
(stunting – 6.8 per cent, wasting – 2.1 per cent) 
and Mexico (stunting – 13.6 per cent, wasting – 
1.6 per cent) fare far better on nutrition indicators 
compared to India.
Ironically, at the same time, India is also grappling 
with the rising menace of ‘over-nutrition’. Nearly 
one fifth of India’s adults are either obese or 
overweight as per NFHS-4 data, leading to an 
increased risk of diabetes and cardiovascular 
disorders.
India can leverage its demographic dividend only if 
its citizens attain optimum levels of health, nutrition 
and cognition.
Recognising this, the government launched the 
POSHAN Abhiyaan in March, 2018 to provide police 
and programmatic guidance to high burden states 
and districts, facilitate multisectoral planning, 
catalyse resource mobilisation and develop a 
surveillance system for nutrition.
Constraints
1. Multidimensional determinants of under-
nutrition are inadequately reflected in 
policymaking 
• Inadequate and poor-quality food is an 
important, but not the only, cause of under-
nutrition. 
• The underlying causes of malnutrition are 
multifaceted and rooted in economic and social 
factors like low levels of female literacy, lack of 
access to clean drinking water and sanitation. 
• At a more proximate level, nearly half of 
childhood under-nutrition is attributable to 
illnesses (in particular, diarrhoea, pneumonia 
and measles) and foetal growth restriction 
that results in low birth weight due to 
maternal nutrition, maternal health, pregnancy 
complications and epigenetic factors. 
2. Design limitations of the Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS)
• The design of the ICDS programme has an 
important limitation – its focus on the first 1000 
days of the child’s life is inadequate. Over 80 
per cent of brain growth occurs during the first 
1000 days of a child’s life. This has a significant 
bearing on work capacity, productivity and IQ 
in adulthood. Hence, nutrition programmes in 
the country must accord the highest priority 
to this critical period of life. However, the 
ICDS programme’s most prominent activities 
are focused on the delivery of pre-school 
education and hot cooked meals as well as 
growth monitoring at 
anganwadi centres for 
children between 3 and 6 years. Only 10% of 
children between 6 and 13 months received an 
adequate diet in 2015-16 (NFHS-4).
3. ICDS programme implementation 
• The ICDS programme is beset with persistent 
challenges such as shortage of staff and field 
workers, poor monitoring, instances of food 
pilferage and poor quality of services.
• Given the complex nature of the challenge, 
a multi-dimensional approach is a must. NITI 
Aayog has already detailed a possible action 
agenda in its National Nutrition Strategy,
2  
which needs to be urgently implemented. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
148
Way Forward
1. Address policy and governance issues
• Provide greater flexibility to states under the 
POSHAN Abhiyaan to adapt programmes 
for context-specific implementation and to 
experiment with innovative approaches to 
attain high coverage, quality, equity and better 
outcomes. 
• Establish an institutional mechanism, outside 
the government, to conduct independent 
annual audits of the programme to achieve 
implementation improvements.
2. Ensure convergent action at all levels
• Develop and implement Annual Integrated 
Health, Nutrition and 
Swachh Bharat Mission 
(SBM) action plans for all districts under the 
POSHAN Abhiyaan. 
o Ensure accountability of the local 
administration.
o Actively engage 
panchayati raj institutions, 
the public distribution system (PDS) and 
public health engineering departments for 
delivery of the action plans.
• Integrate health, SBM and nutrition services 
at the village level through the Village Health, 
Sanitation and Nutrition Committees and by 
ensuring regular observance of Village Health 
Sanitation and Nutrition Days (VHSNDs).
• Develop an implementation guide for 
integrated action for nutrition (‘a cook book’) 
for district administrators.
• Establish a state-level convergence mechanism 
for nutrition under the chief secretary/
equivalent officer and corresponding structures 
at the district and block levels.
3. Implement mission mode action in districts 
with a high burden of malnutrition under 
POSHAN Abhiyaan
• Set up convergence mechanisms at the state, 
district and block levels; develop action plans 
specifying timelines; ensure sufficient budgetary 
allocation; strengthen monitoring systems; 
galvanize coordination; demonstrate change 
guided by annual surveys and intensively 
monitor implementation by NITI Aayog. 
4. Refine programme interventions
Focus on first 1000 days
• As envisaged under the POSHAN Abhiyaan, 
devise a strategy for additional home-based 
contacts under the home-based young child 
care initiative with:
o Mothers having children in the age 
group of 3 months to 2 years to ensure 
compliance with infant and young child 
feeding practices as well as healthy 
behaviours. 
o Mothers having a child with moderate or 
severe malnutrition for regular follow-up. 
o These home visits should be conducted by 
accredited social health activists, a second 
auxiliary nurse midwife or community 
infant and young child feeding counsellors.
• Replace the food-centric approach with more 
broad-based action that includes healthcare 
measures (special care of low birth weight in-
fants and immunization), birth spacing, delaying 
age of marriage, exclusive breastfeeding for 
6 months, and timely and adequate access to 
complementary food interventions. 
• Focus on immunization including Rota Virus 
and Pneumococcal Vaccines; target the vaccines 
preferentially to high focus districts.   
149
Fortification
• Consider mandatory fortification of staples 
produced in the organized sector and provide 
incentives to the industry to do so. 
• Incorporate fortified food grains and double 
fortified salt within government programmes 
such as ICDS, mid-day meal scheme, and PDS.
• Explore approaches to bio-fortification of grains 
for micronutrient deficiencies.
Research
• Create a national nutrition surveillance system 
to track food quality and consumption patterns 
and nutritional deficiency profiles for all age 
groups in different regions.
• Conduct implementation research studies to 
inform improvements in the programme.
o Key research areas include assessing the 
effectiveness of conditional cash transfers/
vouchers in improving child nutrition and 
the optimum formulation of supplementary 
nutrition for young children.
o Evaluate ICDS programme in depth and 
suggest reforms for greater effectiveness.
• Track changes in birth weight and prematurity 
rates at the population level; conduct long-term 
cohort studies on changes in body composition 
and early biomarkers of metabolic disorders.
• Review and redesign nutrition programmes 
targeted at adolescent girls; link these with pre-
pregnancy interventions.
• Test approaches to prevent childhood and adult 
obesity at the population level.
5. Scale-up nutrition MIS and strengthen 
monitoring mechanisms
• Establish an IT-based real time monitoring 
mechanism by rolling out the Common 
Application Software (CAS) developed by the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development on 
a countrywide basis. 
• Undertake joint health and nutrition reviews in 
the field as a standard practice.
• Establish accountability with defined 
responsibilities at all levels – state, district and 
field.
6. Make ‘
POSHAN Abhiyaan’ a Jan Andolan
• Make POSHAN Abhiyaan a community-led 
movement with adequate political backing.
• Develop behavioural change communication 
modules and ensure its use by all frontline 
workers, especially during VHSNDs; emphasise 
individual as well as group counselling.
7. Galvanize the National Anaemia Control 
Programme
• Implement the revised strategy for the anaemia 
control programme based on evidence; 
incorporate home, community, school and facility 
level action; embed the strategy in the activities 
of the emerging health and wellness centres.
• Consider ‘screen and treat’ as a part of the 
anaemia control intervention package.
________________________________________
1 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2016/06/29/india-investing-in-a-childs-early-years-for-a-stronger-economy. Accessed 
April 15, 2018.
2 http://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/document_publication/Nutrition_Strategy_Booklet.pdf. Accessed April 10, 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
150
Objective
•  To create an enabling environment, sans 
institutional and structural barriers. 
•  To enhance the female labour force participation 
rate to at least 30 per cent by 2022-23.
Current Situation
As highlighted in the Economic Survey 2018, 
a number of indicators that reflect the position 
of women in Indian society have moved in the 
right direction. Out of 17 indicators pertaining 
to women’s agency, attitudes and outcomes, 14 
have improved over time. On seven of them, the 
improvement is at least on par with countries at 
similar levels of development as India.
However, a declining female labour force 
participation rate (LFPR) despite increasing levels of 
education and declining fertility rates has emerged 
as a worrying trend. The current female LFPR is 
23.7 per cent (26.7 per cent in rural areas and 16.2 
per cent in urban areas).
1  The declining trend is 
particularly strong in rural areas, where it has gone 
down from 49.7 per cent in 2004-05 to 26.7 per 
cent in 2015-16
2.
32. Gender
Figure 32.1: Progress with respect to gender-related indicators
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Women aged 20-
24 years married
before 18 years
Women having a
bank or savings
account that they
use themselves
Women whose
Body Mass Index
is below normal
Women who are
literate
47.4 
15.1 
35.5 
55.1 
26.8 
53 
22.9 
68.4 
Number of women (%)  
2005-06
 2015-16
All India Average: 25,944 
Source: National Family Health Survey Rounds 3 and 4
151
Figure 32.2: Female labour force participation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
491 
364 
497 
378 
358 
267 238 
180 
246 
194 
205 
162 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1993-1994 1999-2000 2004-2005 2009-2010 2011-2012 2015-2016
Female Labour Force Participation 
Rate (per 1000) 
Rural Urban
Source: Economic Survey
At the all India level, women are confined mainly 
to the large, informal sector. It is estimated that 
if women did as much formal work as men, India 
would experience an additional 1.4 per cent GDP 
growth.3 On average, 66 per cent of women’s work 
in India is unpaid, compared to 12 per cent of men’s.
The government has taken some important 
initiatives to promote gender equality and welfare. 
These include the Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao 
campaign, the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) 
Act, 2017, Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana, 
POSHAN Abhiyaan and the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana.
Constraints
• Constraints of workplace distance, inflexibility 
in working hours, lack of availability of crèches, 
safety etc., deter women from participating in 
economic activities.
• The absence of opportunities for part-time 
work and challenges surrounding re-entry 
into the workforce further worsen the 
situation.
• Women’s work comprises mostly of invisible/
unpaid work.
Way Forward
1. Ensure gender-sensitive thinking for 
legislation and policies keeping in view the 
challenges faced by women including
• different life stages (single women, married 
women, young mothers and women re-entering 
the workforce after a break).
• levels of education (illiterate, school educated, 
vocationally trained, college graduates, 
professionals).
• geographic inequities (rural, urban, towns, 
peri-urban areas, remote locations) and 
marginalization (SC/ST , OBCs etc.).
• special need groups such as single mothers, 
widows, homeless women and women with 
disabilities, among others.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
152
2. Strengthen legal frameworks to eliminate 
discrimination against women and promote 
gender equity
• Craft legislations for women engaged in 
the unorganized sector to ensure at least a 
minimum set of gender-sensitive provisions 
such as access to privacy, minimum wages, 
maternity benefits, leave and grievance 
redressal.
• Ensure mechanisms for implementation of 
mandatory laws like the Maternity Benefit Act 
and The Sexual Harassment of Women at Work 
Place (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 
including for workers in the informal sector.
• Create liberal laws/guidelines that encourage 
women to re-enter the workforce after a break.
• Develop and implement Equal Opportunity 
Policies:
o Establish a set of norms (for job 
advertisements and selection guidelines, 
availability of crèche at workplace, 
grievance redressal, flexi hours, part-time 
work, maternity benefits etc.) for both the 
government and private sectors.
o Persuade the private sector, autonomous 
organizations and others to voluntarily 
inscribe a statement in job advertisements 
to the effect: 
‘We are an equal opportunity 
organization and are fully committed 
to women’s inclusion in our workforce’, 
pending a formal policy. This can be 
accomplished in partnership with 
organisations like the Confederation of 
Indian Industry that have developed equal 
opportunity guidelines.
• Reward villages/districts with an equal child 
sex ratio through information, education, and 
communication (IEC) campaigns. 
3. Generate gender-disaggregated data and 
rank states on key indicators
• Establish a dedicated unit within the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development.
o The unit should focus on data gathering, 
conducting regular reviews with other 
ministries on explicitly defined gender 
targets (e.g. under the 
POSHAN Abhiyaan , 
reduce anaemia rates among adolescent 
girls and women in the 15-49 years age 
group by at least one-third by 2022-23), 
ensuring optimum budgetary resources 
for women’s welfare and evaluating the 
effectiveness of gender-based budgeting.
o In setting up this unit, lessons could 
be leveraged from similar institutional 
arrangements in countries like Rwanda 
(Gender Monitoring Office) and Finland 
(Gender Equality Unit). State government 
should establish similar units at the state 
level. 
• Improve data systems to generate gender-
disaggregated data through the use of 
technology, geo locating information and 
generating maps in real time. 
• Rank states on a set of reliable and comparable 
indicators that reflect changes in the status of 
women at the national and sub-national levels 
over time. 
4. Encourage women’s participation in industry 
and enterprise
• Develop sector/industry specific targets for 
women’s employment and incentivize their 
implementation by firms. 
• Create policies and guidelines, on priority, 
to enhance access to credit by women 
entrepreneurs; provide facilitated credit access 
153
pathways for single women, women’s self-
help groups/guilds/co-operatives, handicapped 
women, and SC/ST women.
• Consider incentivizing sectors/companies that 
have over 30 per cent women workers by 
providing tax benefits.
5. Improve asset ownership and economic 
security
• Prioritize groups of women farmers seeking to 
lease land, water bodies, etc., at the village 
panchayat level.
• Encourage joint registration with spouses/
sole registration of land in the name of the 
woman through registration fee and stamp duty 
concessions through special drives/awareness 
campaigns.
• Recognize and secure women’s rights over 
common property resources like irrigation 
systems, fishing grounds, forests and water. 
6. Create enabling conditions for women 
engaged in agriculture
• Ensure 50 per cent membership of women 
farmers in Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs).
• Consider creating a separate budget to bear the 
registration/processing fee for the registration of 
women FPOs.
• Specially focus on skill development among 
women, particularly for activities such as 
soil conservation, social forestry, dairy 
development, horticulture, organic farming, and 
livestock rearing (including animal husbandry, 
poultry, fisheries).
• Target agricultural extension services to women 
farmers as well, not just males.
7. Enhance women’s skills and leveraging 
ability
• Consider extending the Post Graduate Indira 
Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl Child scheme 
to families with two girl children.
•  Provide relatively higher financial incentives for 
girls’ education until Class XII to curb the higher 
dropout rate among girls and raise the average 
age at marriage by keeping girls in schools.
• Promote skill development among women 
in non-traditional work such as electronic 
technicians, electricians, plumbers, taxi drivers 
etc. 
Figure 32.3: Examples of indicators that could be used for developing the  
gender-based index and ranking states
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Child Sex Ratio Percentage of 
Anaemic Women 
Percentage of 
Girls Completing 
Secondary 
Schooling 
Maternal 
Mortality Rate 
Female Labour 
Force 
Participation Rate  
Percentage of 
Girls who are 
Graduates 
Percentage of 
Women Voters at 
All Levels 
Incidence of 
Crimes Against 
Women 
Enrolment Rate of 
Girls at the 
Primary School 
Level 
Percentage of 
Women owning 
Land, Livestock & 
Housing 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
154
• Organize women into professional groups/
guilds to improve their bargaining power.
• Use platforms like Digital India (i) to create apps 
for the guilds (ii) for marketing and branding 
purposes and (iii) to establish linkages with 
corporates, markets and consumers. 
8. Ensure mobility, security and safety for all 
women
• Provide affordable housing, residential hostels 
and gender friendly facilities in upcoming towns 
and big cities.
• Improve rural connectivity and public transport 
systems.
• Ensure gender-sensitive, rights-based and 
time-bound trials as well as disposal of cases 
pertaining to violence against women.
• Strengthen the standard operating protocols for 
tackling crimes against women, including new 
forms of violence such as cybercrimes. 
• Introduce training (including refresher training) 
on women-specific issues and laws for all ranks 
and categories of police personnel, health 
practitioners, protection officers, legal service 
authorities, judicial authorities as well as other 
stakeholders who interact with survivors of 
violence, especially in remote areas. 
________________________________________
1 http://labourbureaunew.gov.in/UserContent/EUS_5th_1.pdf. Accessed April 15, 2018.
2 NSSO Survey, Various Rounds.
3 McKinsey, 2015.
155
SENIOR CITIZENS
Objective
• To ensure a life of dignity, social security and 
safety for senior citizens, enabling them to 
actively participate in economic development 
and the nation building process.
Current Situation
As per Census 2011,1  India had 10.38 crore senior 
citizens (60 years and above). Of this, 3.8 crore 
were above the age of 80 years. The share of the 
elderly in the population increased from 5.6 per 
cent in 1961 to 8.6 per cent in 2011. It is expected 
to increase to 20 per cent of the population by 
2050.
Senior citizens face several challenges. They 
are prone to chronic illness. However, access to 
institutional support and specialized medical care is 
skewed, with most of these concentrated in urban 
areas and out of reach for the large number of the 
elderly who live in rural areas.
The government has taken steps to provide various 
tax benefits to senior citizens including raising the 
basic exemption limit from INR 2.5 lakh to INR. 3 
lakh, increasing the deduction for health insurance 
from INR 15,000 to INR 50,000 as well as raising 
the deduction for bank interest from INR 10,000 
to INR 50,000. The 
Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana 
Yojana has also been launched to provide a 
maximum pension of INR 10,000 per month with an 
investment of INR 15 lakh. 
Constraints
• Poverty and lack of income security makes it 
difficult to meet even basic needs like food, 
housing, healthcare, etc., for a large number of 
senior citizens.
• There has been a rapid emergence of nuclear 
families and ageing parents living away from 
their children.
• There is a shortage of well-trained personnel 
for delivering care giving and other services for 
senior citizens.
Way Forward
• Given the changing demographics and socio-
economic needs, revise the National Policy 
for Older Persons. The policy should cover 
housing, income security, pension, and access 
to healthcare. It should also emphasize the 
concept of ‘ageing in place’ or ‘ageing in own 
home’.
• Bring schemes pertaining to senior citizens 
under the restructured Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities and 
Senior Citizens. An integrated implementation 
and monitoring plan should be developed in 
consultation with stakeholders and the plan 
33. Senior Citizens, Persons with 
Disability and Transgender Persons

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
156
should be reviewed periodically by an inter-
ministerial committee headed by the Secretary.
• Bring the necessary amendments to the 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Older Persons Act, 2007, currently under 
consideration by the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (MoSJE).
• Consider establishing an old age home in 
every district by 2020 and ensure adherence to 
minimum quality standards. 
• Expand the National Programme for Health 
Care of the Elderly to all districts following a 
comprehensive evaluation of the scheme.
2 
• Prioritize supply of aids and assistive devices for 
senior citizens below the poverty line.   
• Ensure a barrier-free environment in all public 
buildings, parks, etc., for the elderly.
• Strengthen the National Institute of Social 
Defence and Regional Resource Training 
Centres to meet the rising demand for quality 
caregivers.
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Objective
• To create opportunities for and empower persons 
with disabilities (PwDs) to realize their potential 
and live a productive and dignified life.
Current Situation
According to Census 2011, India had 2.68 crore 
PwDs constituting approximately 2.21 per cent 
of the total population. India enacted the first 
legislation for PwDs in 1995, which has been 
replaced by the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016. The Act is harmonized with the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities, 2006, and lists 21 categories of 
disabilities. India also formulated its first National 
Policy for PwDs in 2006.
PwDs face several challenges.3 According to the 
Census 2011, 27 per cent of disabled children 
between the ages of 5-19 had never attended an 
educational institution. Only 50 per cent of the 
Figure 33.1: School attendance of children with disabilities between 5-19 years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61% 12% 
27% Attending Educational
Institution
Attended Educational
Institution
Never Attended an
Educational Institution
Source: Census 2011
157
Figure 33.2: Literacy status of PwDs
Figure 33.3: Allocation and expenditure pertaining to the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38% 
55% 
45% 
62% 
45% 
55% 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Men Women Total
Literacy Levels of PwDs (%) 
Literate
Illiterate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
500 
560 565 565 
223.9 241.71 
337.96 
375.29 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
 Budget & Actual Expenditure (INR 
crore) 
Budget Estimate
Actual Expenditure
Source: Census 2011
Source: Government of India budget documents
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
158
disabled population in the 15-59 years category 
was working. 
They also tend to be stigmatized and discriminated 
against and lag behind others with respect to 
access to basic infrastructure and opportunities for 
economic participation.
The Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (DEPwDs) has the overall responsibility 
for implementing several schemes; however, 
utilization of funds has been a challenge. 
Constraints
• Accurate identification of the disabled 
population in India has been a major problem. 
People tend to hide their disability to avoid 
facing social stigma. 
• Beyond Census statistics, there is a lack of 
appropriately disaggregated data for PwDs 
generated at regular intervals.
4 In India, the 
last survey on disability was carried out by the 
National Sample Survey Organisation in 2002. 
• Disability related issues require multi-sectoral 
action, which has been difficult to achieve in 
practice.
• The National Institutes (NIs), Composite 
Regional Centres (CRCs), District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) and the 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) need 
special attention to ensure adequacy of 
resources and infrastructure as well as effective 
monitoring of schemes.
Way Forward
1. Generate data on PwDs
• Disaggregate data by sex, age and socio-
economic status in order to identify reliable and 
regular trends for informed policymaking. 
• Feed data collected into an electronic database 
for PwDs at the national level and link with the 
Unique Disability Identity Card.
2. Bolster the institutional architecture and 
policy framework
• Reorient the DEPwD to focus on data collection, 
identifying gaps and evaluating the impact of 
various schemes, instead of focusing on the 
implementation of a large number of schemes 
with small budget allocations.
• Bring programmes focused on improving 
specific issues related to PwDs under the 
purview of the relevant line ministries. 
• Earmark at least 5 per cent of the total budget 
of social sector ministries for schemes for PwDs. 
3. Education
• Include courses in disability etiquette and 
success stories on PwDs in the mainstream 
curriculum to change attitudes towards PwDs.
• Provide special education training in teacher 
training courses.
• Enhance scholarships/fellowships to students 
with disabilities.
• Make schools more inclusive by addressing the 
barriers related to the physical environment 
(e.g. accessible toilets), admission procedures 
as well as curriculum design. 
• Ensure that schools have at least one section 
of every class accessible under the Universal 
Design Guidelines. 
• Foster partnerships between the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and MoSJE to 
promote synergies among inclusive and special 
schools in the government and private sectors.
• Develop indicators for rating schools on 
inclusivity. 
159
• Include disabled friendly sports, cultural and 
technical programmes in schools and colleges.
4. Healthcare
• Provide aids and assistive devices to at least 3 
lakh beneficiaries every year.
• Conduct cochlear implant and corrective 
surgeries for 5000 children annually. 
• Establish 20 state spinal injury centres.
• Set up early diagnostic and intervention 
centres at the district level to screen children 
and identify special needs or requirements for 
assistive devices at an early age. 
5. Employment and income generation
• Integrate the skill development scheme with 
schemes of the National Trust (e.g., Disha), to 
address the needs of the intellectually disabled.
• Establish dedicated training centres for PwDs to 
meet the requirements of the private sector.
• Integrate initiatives of various ministries 
to provide skill training, soft loans and 
entrepreneurship opportunities to PwDs.
6. Institutional strengthening
• Upgrade NIs into centres of excellence.
• Establish 50 CRCs in states having a population 
of more than 6 crore. 
• Provide comprehensive rehabilitation services to 
50 lakh PwDs through the NIs and CRCs.
• Enrol 17,000 rehabilitation personnel in various 
long-term courses offered by NIs and CRCs 
every year.
7. Accessibility and inclusivity
• Make the Accessible India Campaign a mass 
movement with the involvement of citizens and 
civil society.
• Conduct awareness programmes in collab-
orations with DDRCs, CRCs and Vocational 
Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs).
• Incorporate universal design and accessibility 
standards in engineering, architecture and 
computer science studies.
• Introduce the requirement of an accessibility 
certificate for all future commercial enterprises 
above a specified size in order to be awarded a 
completion certificate.
• Extend the DDRC schemes to all districts.
• Construct residential homes for disabled adults 
whose parents are no longer alive.
• Adopt a life-cycle approach for community-
based rehabilitation in mission mode. 
TRANSGENDER PERSONS
Objective
• To ensure a life of dignity, social security and 
safety for transgender persons, enabling them 
to actively participate in economic development 
and the nation building process.
Current Situation
As per Census 2011, India had 4.87 lakh 
transgender persons. The transgender community 
is among one of the most marginalized 
communities in the country. Extreme social 
exclusion diminishes their self-esteem and is 
a violation of their human rights. An Expert 
Committee constituted under the direction of the 
Honourable Supreme Court recommended several 
measures to ameliorate their problems. Following 
that, the “Scheme for Transgender Persons” was 
launched.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
160
Constraints
• Parliament is yet to pass the Rights of 
Transgender Persons Bill, 2016.
• Accurate identification of transgender persons is 
a major challenge.
• The implementation of the “Scheme for 
Transgender Persons” is suboptimal.
Way Forward
• Provide for identification of transgender persons 
in all government and non-government records 
by introducing a separate column to include the 
third gender. 
• Sensitize communities towards the challenges 
and needs of transgender persons.
• Create a forum for the active participation of 
transgender persons at all levels of governance.
• Put in place institutional mechanisms to 
effectively implement programmes for 
transgender persons. 
• Determine the number of transgender persons 
and map their socio-economic status to 
design customized policy interventions. This 
enumeration and mapping can be carried out by 
the MoSJE along with the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation.
• Mandate the provision of housing and 
community services to accommodate at least 50 
per cent of transgender persons.
• Formulate and implement a scheme for 
establishing residential schools in all districts for 
transgender persons.
• Design a scheme for providing skill and 
employability training to transgender persons to 
integrate them with mainstream society.
• Launch a centrally sponsored scheme to provide 
pension to transgender persons above 60 years. 
• Ensure 
Aadhaar and Direct Benefit Transfer 
based implementation and monitoring of social 
security programmes.
•  Consider creating a fund at the national level 
for supporting states that have mapped out 
the needs of and designed the necessary policy 
interventions for various vulnerable sections 
of society including persons with disabilities, 
senior citizens and transgender persons in line 
with the relevant legislations.
________________________________________
1 Elderly in India, 2016, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.
2 As of 2017, the programme was being implemented in 281 districts across 27 states and 6 union territories.
3 Disabled Persons in India, A Statistical Profile 2016, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.
4 Disabled Persons in India, A Statistical Profile 2016, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.
161
SCs, STs, OBCs, De-Notified Tribes 
(DNTs), Nomadic Tribes (NTs) and 
Semi-Nomadic Tribes (SNTs)
Objective
• To accelerate the socio-economic development 
of SCs, STs, OBCs, safai karamcharis as well as 
DNTs, NTs and SNTs through focused affirmative 
action so as to bring them on par with the 
rest of the population as far as key human 
development indicators are concerned.
Current Situation
High incidence of poverty and low educational 
attainment are the two major challenges faced by 
weaker sections in India. Other challenges include 
high levels of malnutrition and limited opportunities 
for meaningful economic engagement.  
Among the weaker sections, 
safari karmacharis 
constitute one of the most deprived groups. Other 
groups that require special attention include the 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) among 
the STs as well as performing artists and those 
engaged in begging among the DNTs, NTs and 
SNTs.
Research
1 on SCs and STs suggests that historical 
inequities among the different segments of India’s 
workforce have diminished over the last three 
decades. The gaps have narrowed most markedly 
for the youngest cohorts in the workforce, especially 
in the domain of education. However, there is still 
a long way to go before the inequities are bridged 
completely.
34. Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes 
(STs), Other Backward Classes (OBCs), Other Tribal 
Groups and Minorities
Table 34.1: Incidence of poverty across social groups
Source: Planning Commission
Social Group (%) Rural Urban
2004-05 2009-10 2011-12 2004-05 2009-10 2011-12
SCs 53.53 42.26 31.5 40.56 34.11 21.70
STs 62.28 47.37 45.3 35.52 30.38 24.10
OBCs 39.80 31.9 22.60 30.60 24.30 15.40
Others 41.79 33.8 15.5 25.68 20.09 8.10
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
162
 • Design schemes that are tailored to and 
narrowly focus on the challenges and needs 
of specific communities. 
 • Institutionalize social audits for assessing 
the impact of these schemes on the basis of 
quantifiable benefits to targeted households.
 • Establish the National Institute for Tribal 
Research.
 • Earmark funds under all developmental 
programmes for DNTs, SNTs and NTs.
 • Put in place mechanisms to regularly monitor 
the implementation of legislations like the 
Panchayat (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act 
and Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006.
 • Set up a permanent commission for NTs, 
DNTs and SNTs along the lines of the 
National Commission for SCs and STs.
2. Education
 • Establish residential schools in uncovered 
blocks/districts with facilities for vocational 
training.
 • Define and ensure adherence to quality 
parameters for existing and new residential 
schools. 
 • Increase the number of scholarships 
provided under the pre-matric, post-matric, 
Constraints
• Problems of isolation, exclusion and occupation-
al subjugation are major obstacles to main-
streaming these social groups in the socio-eco-
nomic development of the country. 
• Governance including lack of inter-ministerial 
convergence and suboptimal targeting of bene-
ficiaries is another major issue.
• Resources are distributed thinly among a 
large number of schemes, especially under the 
scheduled caste sub-plan (SCSP) and tribal sub-
plan (TSP), instead of among a few targeted 
schemes.
• There is limited awareness about the schemes 
resulting in leakages and denial of benefits. 
• Mainstreaming these groups has also been 
hampered by the inability to incorporate specific 
cultural and social requirements of SC/ST groups 
while designing interventions.
Way Forward
1. Institutional and programmatic strengthening 
 • Undertake a baseline survey and 
target remote and tribal habitations for 
implementation of various development 
programmes. 
Table 34.2: Literacy rate among social groups2
Source: Census data
Social Group (%) 1981 1991 2001 2011
SCs 21.38 37.41 54.69 66.07
STs 21.38 37.41 54.69 66.07
Others 43.57 52.21 64.84 72.99
163
National Fellowship and National Overseas 
Scholarship schemes for SCs, STs and OBCs.
3. Economic empowerment
 • Expand the Stand-Up India scheme to include 
uncovered social groups like OBCs, DNTs, NTs 
and SNTs.
 • Extend venture capital funds and credit 
guarantee schemes for covering STs, OBCs, 
DNTs, NTs and SNTs.
 • Cover a larger number of beneficiaries under 
various finance and development schemes 
with an annual increase of 10 per cent every 
year.
 • Provide concessional loans for promoting 
entrepreneurship among OBCs by doubling 
the number of beneficiaries covered under 
the National Backward Classes Finance & 
Development Corporation by 2022-23. 
 • Encourage indigenous tribal medicine 
alongside other systems to create additional 
livelihood opportunities. 
 • Establish contact points with potential 
employers along with pre-job training 
sessions for youth.
4. Miscellaneous
 •  Ensure universal coverage of DNT , SNT and 
NT populations for BPL and 
Aadhaar cards.
 • Prepare a Vulnerability Index and 
Vulnerability Intervention Index for PVTGs 
based on the methodology suggested by the 
National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad. These indices will 
be useful for assessing the socio-economic 
disparities between PVTGs and other social 
groups and designing policy interventions 
accordingly.
 • Extend habitat rights to PVTGs within the 
FRA framework, as has been done for the 
Baiga Tribe of Dindori District, Madhya 
Pradesh.
 • Provide project-based funding under special 
central assistance (SCA) to SCSP and to TSP , 
especially in 
gram panchayats/blocks where 
the population of SCs/STs is more than 25 per 
cent.
 • Prioritize vulnerable groups like tribal 
children under the National Nutrition Mission 
through tag-tracking and additional home 
visits for underweight children conducted by 
frontline workers.
 • Empower marginalized communities by 
promoting community-owned radio stations.
 • Promote habitations along the lines of 
Samasthapuram in Tamil Nadu where people 
belonging to all communities live together.
MINORITIES
Objective
• To bridge the gap between minority 
communities and the rest of the population 
with respect to various socio-economic and 
human development indicators through 
affirmative action.
Current Situation
As per Census 2011, of the total population of 121 
crore, Hindus constitute 79.8 per cent, Muslims 14.2 
per cent, Christians 2.3 per cent, Sikhs 1.7 per cent, 
Buddhists 0.7 per cent and Jains 0.4 per cent. While 
improvements have been made on several fronts, 
religious minorities lag behind on certain indicators 
pertaining to educational attainment, gender 
equality and workforce participation. 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
164
Table 34.3: Literacy rate among minority communities
Figure 34.1: Workforce participation rate
Source: Census 2001 and Census 2011
Source: Census 2011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40% 
41% 
43% 
36% 
36% 
33% 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%
National
Hindus
Buddhists
Sikhs
Jains
Muslims
Workforce Participation Rate of 
Various Religious Groups (%) 
Community (%) Census 2011 Census 2001
Males Females Total Males Females Total
National 80.87 64.63 72.98 75.3 53.7 64.8
Hindus 81.69 64.34 73.27 76.2 53.2 65.1
Muslims 74.73 62.03 68.53 67.6 50.1 59.1
Christians 87.69 81.40 84.53 84.4 76.2 80.3
Sikhs 80.02 70.30 75.39 75.2 63.1 69.4
Buddhist 88.31 74.04 81.28 83.1 61.7 72.7
Jains 96.78 92.91 94.88 - - -
165
Figure 34.2: Out of school children by religious group
Source: Sarva Siksha Abhiyan 3
Disaggregated data from a survey 4  highlighted 
that the highest proportion of out of 
schoolchildren in the country belong to Muslim 
communities (4.43 per cent), followed by Hindus 
(2.73 per cent), Christians (1.52 per cent) and 
others (1.26 per cent). 
Data from the 68th Round of the National Sample 
Survey revealed that the proportion of households 
in urban India with casual labour and self-
employment as the dominant income source was 
the highest among Muslims at 15 per cent and 50 
per cent respectively. The Workforce Participation 
Rate among Muslims, Sikhs and Jains was lower 
than the national average according to Census 
2011.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.73 2.97 
1.95 
4.43 4.34 
4.58 
1.52 
1.77 
1.06 1.26 1.33 
1.06 
2.97 3.13 
2.54 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
All Rural Urban
Out of school children (%) 
Hindus
Muslims
Christians
Others
All
Constraints
• Data on development indicators for minorities is 
not generated at regular intervals. 
• Some minority communities are also included 
under SCs, STs and OBCs, which could result in 
the duplication of schemes for the same set of 
beneficiaries. 
• Awareness levels and demand for programmes 
being implemented for the benefit of minorities 
are limited.
Way Forward
1. Institutional restructuring 
• Vest the primary responsibility for a number 
of schemes currently being implemented by 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
166
the Ministry of Minority Affairs (MoMA) with 
the relevant line ministries. MoMA should be 
involved with the finalization of physical and 
financial targets by the line ministries.  
• Increase the emphasis of the MoMA on 
data collection and analysis, identifying gap 
areas, online monitoring of the PM’s 15-Point 
Programme, evaluating the impact of various 
schemes and popularizing schemes in local 
languages using social media. 
2. Education
• Enhance pre-matric scholarships, post-matric 
scholarships, merit-cum-means scholarships, 
Maulana Azad National Fellowships and 
National Overseas Scholarships with a 15 per 
cent increase annually from 2019-20.
• Increase the number of scholarships for girls 
from minority communities by 10 per cent every 
year.
• Ensure that girls who pass out from 
Kasturba 
Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas can continue their 
education after completing Class 8. 
• Provide access to public transport in the form of 
buses and cycles or vouchers for meeting private 
transport costs to raise enrolment rates among 
girls from vulnerable communities. 
• Train at least 100,000 minority women under the 
Nai Roshni scheme every year.
3. Economic empowerment 
• Identify the poorest among the minority 
communities through the Socio-Economic Caste 
Census data for proper targeting of various 
schemes. 
• By 2022-23, provide integrated education and 
livelihood programmes to 100,000 beneficiaries 
under the 
Nai Manzil programme. 
• Train at least 350,000 beneficiaries during the 
5-year period under Seekho Aur Kamao.
• Achieve a 15 per cent increase per annum in 
loans to vulnerable sections through the use of 
alternative channels like regional rural banks.
• Put out job advertisements in Urdu and local 
language newspapers as well as through other 
locally appropriate channels. 
________________________________________
1 http://www.ncaer.org/uploads/photo-gallery/files/1405592467IPF%202014%20Bhattacharjee-Hnatkoyska-lahiri%20Conference.pdf. 
Accessed April 29, 2018.
2 Other Backward Classes (OBCs) made its way into the lexicon of India’s social justice movement in the year 1990. Hence, comparable 
Census data is not available for OBCs for all the Census years.
3 http://ssa.nic.in/pabminutes-documents/NS.pdf. Accessed April 24, 2018.
4 http://ssa.nic.in/pabminutes-documents/NS.pdf. Accessed April 24, 2018.
GOVERNANCE
169
Objective
• Achieve balanced development in India 
by uplifting 115 districts, currently below 
the national average in the areas of health 
and nutrition, education, agriculture and 
water resources, financial inclusion and skill 
development, and basic infrastructure.
Current Situation
The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) was 
launched on January 5, 2018, by the Honourable 
Prime Minister. Under phase-1 of ADP , 115 districts 
were identified based on the level of human 
development, physical infrastructure, threat of 
left wing extremism (LWE) and the views of state 
governments. Over 15 per cent of India’s population 
lives in these districts.
A list of 49 target indicators has been developed by 
NITI Aayog. These will be regularly monitored for 
promoting improvements in health and nutrition, 
education, agriculture and water resources, 
financial inclusion and skill development, and basic 
infrastructure.
In April 2018, NITI Aayog issued a ranking of these 
districts according to baseline data collated from 
secondary sources on these selected indicators. 
According to this, the top five districts are 
Vizianagaram (Andhra Pradesh), Rajnandgaon 
(Chhattisgarh), Osmanabad (Maharashtra), 
Cuddapah (Andhra Pradesh), and Ramanathapuram 
(Tamil Nadu) with a score ranging from 46.78 per 
cent to 48.13 per cent. 
The bottom five districts are Shrawasti (Uttar 
Pradesh), Kiphire (Nagaland), Singrauli (Madhya 
Pradesh), Asifabad (Telangana) and Mewat 
(Haryana) with a score ranging from 26.02 per cent 
to 28.13 per cent. 
Despite economic progress in the country, if 
these places have remained underdeveloped, it 
is because they suffer from a host of contributing 
factors. Relatively poorer endowment of physical 
resources, lack of infrastructure, poor social capital, 
low standards of health, nutrition, education and 
skill, poor governance and above all, inhabitants 
demotivated due to years of poverty and deprivation 
can be cited as major contributory factors.
Constraints
The constraints impeding the development of these 
districts are institutional; aggregating assistance 
from different sources and applying the principle 
of convergence indicates that paucity of funds is 
unlikely to be a major issue. 
35. Balanced Regional Development: 
Transforming Aspirational Districts

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
170
• Governance challenges:
o Governance inadequacy hampers the 
effective implementation of government 
schemes. 
o The institutional framework has been 
fragmented because of the multiplicity of 
implementing agencies and schemes. 
o There is no accountability on the part 
of either the government or district 
administrations.
• Non-availability of periodical data makes 
it difficult to track progress and implement 
evidence-based policymaking. 
• There is lack of social awareness and 
community participation in development 
programmes.
• There is lack of competitiveness among districts 
to improve developmental performance.
Way Forward
The ADP aims to address governance issues by 
using a combination of approaches: lifting levels 
of aspirations through a vision and district plan, 
adequate institutional arrangements, convergence 
in all stakeholders’ efforts and above all, ranking-
based public competition among the districts by 
setting up a real-time monitoring mechanism.
1. Create a positive narrative of development 
by making development a mass movement
Referring to these districts as ‘aspirational’ rather 
than ‘backward’ highlights the programme’s 
recognition that people are the most valuable 
resource to improve a district’s performance. 
Changes in people’s mind-sets and attitudes are 
critical to achieve progress.
As a strategy, district officials will draw up a 
vision and action plan for their districts spanning 
the period 2018-19 to 2022-23. Officials 
will engage the public in formulating these 
plans. Each action plan should be based on a 
SWOT analysis. To facilitate the preparation 
of such plans, NITI Aayog has already shared 
a broad common framework with all district 
administrations.    
Setting off a virtuous cycle of growth in 
aspirational districts requires that people from 
all walks of life – especially those who have 
a track record of effecting change despite 
existing challenges – come together. The 
scheme’s design encourages states and district 
administrations to give a lead role to such 
champions of change to turn this initiative into a 
mass movement. 
2. Use data to inform decision-making and spur 
competition among districts 
Composite Index and Data: Across the selected 
dimensions, NITI Aayog has identified 49 key 
performance indicators (KPIs) with 81 data 
points. Extensive consultation with central 
ministries and knowledge partners informed the 
selection of these KPIs. An online dashboard 
allows for the tracking and display of district-
level data on a real-time basis. 
A key policy question is how to prioritize among 
different indicators across sectors. The ADP 
assigns different weights to the indicators, 
informed by a policy focus on social sectors. 
Health and nutrition, and education have been 
given the highest weightage and cumulatively, 
they account for 21 of the 49 indicators. Table 
35.1 indicates the weights assigned to each of 
the core dimensions.
171
Table 35.1: Core dimensions of ADP and their weightage
Source: NITI Aayog
Dimension Weightage Number of Indicators
Health and Nutrition 30% 13
Education 30% 8
Agriculture and Water Resources 20% 10
Financial Inclusion and Skill Development 10% 11
Basic Infrastructure 10% 07
Rankings: Ranking districts based on 
performance relative to their baseline highlights 
the progress made by a district. Making these 
rankings and the underlying data available in 
the public domain will help boost competition 
between districts.
3. Converge initiatives across all levels of 
government
The ADP aims to ensure convergence between 
different government schemes while also 
seeking complementarity between public 
initiatives and private efforts of households (for 
example, choosing to attend a course on skill 
development). To achieve this, the action plan 
prepared by the district collectors of aspirational 
districts will identify the thrust activity, 
map existing schemes and their respective 
implementation agencies and set targets for 
rapid improvement. 
Figure 35.1 highlights that for every thrust 
Figure 35.1: Illustration of how the ADP converges stakeholders’ efforts in the 
prevention of stunting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thrust Activity (Preventing stunting)   
Household 
Income  
Scheme-1 
National 
Health 
Mission   
 (Asha 
Workers)   
Scheme-II 
ICDS 
Anganwadi  
Scheme-
III 
Mid Day 
Meal  
Schools  
Scheme-IV 
Subsidised 
ration 
through PDS  
Fair Price 
shop   
Scheme-V 
State govt. 
Initiatives 
Scheme-VI 
Programmes 
for sanitation 
& drinking 
water  
Source: Adapted from Aruna Sharma: Mainstreaming of Resource Convergence in Policymaking, Programme Design and Execution. 
(December 2013) 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
172
activity identified, such as the prevention 
of stunting, there would be many schemes 
addressing the issue, which in turn would have 
different implementing agencies. The ADP will 
bring together these efforts.
4. Promote federalism and put in place 
institutional mechanisms to ensure 
teamwork between the central, state and 
district administration
Harnessing and creating synergies among the 
efforts of different stakeholders is the backbone 
of the ADP . While states are the main drivers 
and district magistrates/collectors are the 
fulcrum of the programme, a major innovation 
here is the emphasis on team formation. Senior 
Government of India officials of the rank of 
Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary have been 
appointed as ‘guardians’ (‘
prabharis’) for a 
district. Their role is to act as a bridge between 
the central and state governments. 
Set up Empowered Committees of Secretaries 
of Government of India to supervise and 
troubleshoot. At the centre, committees have 
been constituted including the Secretaries of key 
ministries/departments that are implementing 
schemes in the social sector. Their mandate is to 
fine-tune existing programmes and improve their 
impact. 
5. Partner with expert organizations with 
demonstrated technical competence 
While data-based objective ranking and 
competition among districts are major elements 
of the ADP’s strategy, another core component 
is bringing in technical expertise through public 
private partnerships. The approach here is to 
involve all, including philanthropies, the private 
sector under the Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) framework and civil societies, in 
implementing the ADP . 
173
Objectives
The North-East Region (NER) should:
• Have adequate road, rail and air connectivity, 
waterways, internet connectivity and financial 
inclusion. This will form the platform upon 
which suitable interventions for all sectors 
where the NER has a comparative advantage 
(for e.g., tourism, hydropower generation, 
handicrafts, organic agriculture, etc.) can be 
effectively implemented.
• By 2022-23, the region should also be 
developed for enhanced trade, particularly for 
the export of products made in the NER, to the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
region and other neighbouring countries 
(Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal).
Current Situation
The NER consists of eight states, namely Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The region accounts 
for 3.78 per cent of India’s population and covers 
7.98 per cent of its total geographical area. Its 
contribution to national GDP is 2.5 per cent.1  Figure 
36.1 illustrates the per capita net state domestic 
36. The North-East Region
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,23,339
60,526 55,603
71,318
1,14,524
83,621
2,33,954
80,027
0
50,000
1,00,000
1,50,000
2,00,000
2,50,000
Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
INR
All India Average: 94,732
Figure 36.1: Per capita NSDP for north-east states, 2015-16
Source: MoSPI
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
174
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21,919 
15,661 16,299 
20,775 
30,357 
26,129 26,215 25,984 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
INR 
All India Average: 25,944 
Figure 36.2: Per capita NSDP for north-east states, 2004-05
Source: NER Vision 20202 
product (NSDP) for the year 2015-16 (base year 
2011-12) for the North-Eastern states.
The figure clearly illustrates the disparity in 
development within the region. While five out of 
the eight states have a per capita income below the 
national average, Sikkim enjoys a per capita income 
level that is 2.5 times the national average. 
A comparison of the per capita incomes in these 
states in 2015-16 and 2004-05 (given in Figure 
36.2) indicates that the ranking within the NER has 
also changed over the years.
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim have shown the 
most significant improvement in per capita incomes. 
Per capita income in Arunachal Pradesh, which 
was below the national average in 2004-05, rose 
to 1.3 times the national average in 2015-16. 
Sikkim’s per capita income, which was on par with 
the national average, increased to 2.5 times the 
national average in 2015-16. States like Nagaland 
and Tripura, which were on par with the national 
average in 2004-05, have fallen behind. The 
heterogeneity among the NE states is noteworthy 
and calls for a state specific development approach. 
The North-East states have performed well in different 
aspects of human development. For e.g. according to 
the Sikkim Human Development Report 2014,
3  Sikkim 
increased its social sector spending from 23 per cent of 
total expenditure in 2001 to 37 per cent in 2012-13. 
The female labour force participation rate in Sikkim is 
40 per cent compared to the national average of 26 
per cent. Furthermore, according to the National Family 
Health Survey - 4,
4  all states in the NER except Assam 
have a lower mortality rate for under-fives than the 
national average. Lastly, Sikkim was recently declared 
India’s first fully organic state.
175
This area is strategically important for India both for its 
geographical location and the resources found there. 
Some of the key strengths of the NER are given below:
• NER shares about 5,437 km of international 
boundaries with Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, 
Myanmar and Nepal.5 
• Total coal reserves in the NER is estimated at 
1,597 million tonnes.6  These were exported in 
the past. 
• Limestone deposits are found extensively 
throughout the NER.
• Petroleum, natural gas and uranium are other 
natural resources to be found in the NER. 
• According to the India State of Forest Report 
2017,
7  some of the North-Eastern states have 
the highest forest covers in the country. The total 
forest cover in the region is 1,71,306 sq km, which 
is 65.3 per cent of its geographical area, which is 
thrice the national average of 21.5 per cent. 
• Hydropower potential for the NER has been 
estimated at 58,971 MW,
8  which is 40 per cent 
of India’s total hydropower potential. However, 
only 2.1 per cent of this vast potential of clean 
energy has been utilized.  
Despite the region’s strengths and the government’s 
focus on developing the NER, a lot of challenges 
remain. These are highlighted below.
Constraints
While the NER has all the ingredients needed 
to become prosperous, it could not achieve the 
expected level of economic growth mainly due to 
inadequate road, rail and air connectivity. A lot of 
its resources remain untapped. For e.g.
• Despite abundant rainfall, the irrigation 
coverage in this region is less than the national 
average of 46.35 per cent.
• The NER’s natural scenic beauty and distinct 
ethnic heritage offers great attractions for 
mountaineering, trekking and other tourist 
activities. However, the tourism industry 
remains underdeveloped. 
 
 
Figure 36.3: Timeline of government initiatives for the development of  
north-east region
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
176
The major constraints hampering economic growth 
in the NER are:
• Inadequate infrastructure in terms of limited air, 
rail and road connectivity.
• Under-utilization of available natural resources
• Safety and security related issues.
• Difficulties in transfer of land on lease to 
entrepreneurs.
Way Forward
• A targeted strategy needs to be devised, in 
consultation with representatives from all eight 
NE states, to disseminate information on the 
various central government schemes that are 
already in place for the development of the 
NER. All central ministries and departments 
should consider sharing their targets and 
vision for the NER and spell out modalities for 
spending the stipulated 10 per cent of their 
budget for the NER. The Ministry of Finance 
should formally acknowledge the availability of 
funds under the NLCPR. 
• Each state within the NER may be encouraged 
to draw up their development blueprint in 
consultation with the NITI Aayog and the  
North-East Council (NEC). 
• As noted earlier in this chapter, different states 
in the NER have achieved success in different 
aspects of human development. The Ministry 
of Development of North-Eastern Region 
(MDoNER) should document such best practices 
and disseminate its findings within the region 
so that the learning can be implemented 
suitably in other states. 
• The NER Vision 2020
9  noted, “responsive 
governance and planning from below require 
significant augmentation of capacity”. It is 
recommended that mechanisms like project 
management units be considered to augment 
the capacities of state governments.
• To address the issue of inadequate connectivity 
in the NER, the following measures need to be 
taken:
o As a general point, transit treaties for the 
NER and its neighbouring countries need 
to be put in place. India could consider 
initiating a regional multi-modal transit 
agreement between the NER and the four 
neighbouring countries. 
o It is necessary to monitor closely on-going 
transport projects with focus on projects 
that boost inter-regional connectivity and 
help transform the region into a major 
trade hub with South East Asia. It is recom-
mended that a high-level committee be set 
up in 2018 (possibly as a sub-committee 
under the “NITI Forum for North-East”) to 
focus on expediting such projects, includ-
ing the Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Trans-
port Project, the India-Myanmar-Thailand 
Trilateral Highway, the 5-km road stretch 
between the border city of Zokhawthar in 
Mizoram and Rih in Myanmar and the rail 
link from Imphal to Moreh and further from 
Moreh to Kalay (in Myanmar)
o One of the projects that will boost 
connectivity within India and significantly 
benefit the NER is the Agartala-Akhaura rail 
project. This project, 15 km in length, has 
already been sanctioned and will reduce 
the distance between Kolkata and Agartala 
by 1,200 km.
10  The Ministry of Railways 
needs to fast track the project.
• UDAN III may be launched. Its international 
component could connect Guwahati to ASEAN 
capitals.  
177
o The viability gap funding (VGF) required for 
UDAN III could come from the Government 
of Assam or could be met from the NLCPR. 
It is envisaged that VGF requirements 
would not be large and demand will rise in 
response to improved air connectivity. 
• The Government of India and the NER should 
work together to create an environment 
to attract more private investment into 
the region. On March 21, 2018, the Union 
Cabinet approved the North-East Industrial 
Development Scheme (NEIDS)  with a project 
outlay of INR 3,000 crore up to March 
2020, to incentivize new industrial units in 
manufacturing and services sector in the 
region.
11 Indicators of development in the NER 
should be monitored closely and taken up in 
mission mode. 
• A few other measures that could also be 
considered over the next few years are:
o Set up industrial estates/parks in the 
region.
o Focus on sectors such as organic 
agriculture, tourism, renewable energy, 
etc, in which the NER has competitive 
advantage. 
o Accelerate skill development as suitable for 
the region. 
• One of the most pressing issues hampering 
the progress of hydropower projects in the 
region is rehabilitation and resettlement (R&R). 
Attractive R&R packages should be devised for 
hydropower projects in the region.
• NER is endowed with natural beauty, rich 
flora and fauna and a unique culture. Tourism, 
particularly eco-tourism and adventure tourism, 
should be promoted by identifying suitable sites 
and creating supporting infrastructure at these 
sites through the PPP mode.
• Water management is a major issue in the NER. 
Early completion of ongoing irrigation projects, 
particularly Borolia, Dhansiri and Champavati 
in Assam, and Thoubal and Dolaithabi Barrage 
in Manipur under the Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefits Programme, should be accorded high 
priority. It is expected that the establishment of 
the North East Water Management Authority 
will help address the issue. 
________________________________________
1 As of 2015-16, GSDP data for some North-East states is not available beyond 2015-16 with the Central Statistics Office.
2 http://www.mdoner.gov.in/sites/default/files/silo2_content/ner_vision/Vision_2020.pdf. Accessed May 02, 2018.
3 http://www.sikkim.gov.in/stateportal/Link/Sikkim%20Human%20Developent%20Report%202014.pdf. Accessed May 02, 2018.
4 http://rchiips.org/NFHS/NFHS-4Reports/India.pdf. Accessed May 03, 2018.
5 http://planningcommission.nic.in/sectors/NTDPC/voulme3_p2/transport_dev_v3_p2.pdf. Accessed May 05, 2018.
6 https://coal.nic.in/content/coal-reserves. Accessed February 27, 2018.
7 http://fsi.nic.in/isfr2017/isfr-forest-cover-2017.pdf. Accessed May 02, 2018.
8 The North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited (NEEPCO) http://neepco.co.in/neepco/#. Accessed February 03, 2018.
9 http://www.mdoner.gov.in/sites/default/files/silo2_content/ner_vision/Vision_2020.pdf. Accessed May 02, 2018.
10 http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/5.2_Manoj_Singh_NITI_Aayog.pdf. Accessed May 04, 2018.
11 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=177822. Accessed May 02, 2018.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
178
Objective
• To ensure the safety and security of citizens and 
ensure access to effective legal systems and 
speedy delivery of justice.
Current Situation
Legal and judicial reforms are urgently needed to 
address the massive pendency and capacity issues 
in Indian courts, which impede access to justice. 
Several archaic and defunct laws have already 
been repealed and many others are in the process 
of being weeded out. The recently announced 
umbrella scheme on “Modernisation of Police 
Forces” to strengthen law and order and modernize 
the police is a welcome stimulus. A part of police 
reform is intrinsically linked to legal/judicial reform, 
which would result in efficient criminal justice 
dispensation.  
Constraints
1. The major challenge facing the judiciary is the 
huge backlog of over 2.7 crore pending cases. 
There are also significant capacity issues.
2. Ease of doing business in India is severely 
constrained by the inability to enforce contracts 
or laws, lengthy and costly litigation and 
arbitration processes, and archaic legislations. 
Although we have the Arbitration Law of 
1996, which is in tune with global principles, 
it has not yielded desired results in terms of 
lessening the pressure on courts. Nor have the 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms been 
utilized adequately. The World Bank “Doing 
Business Report” 2018 ranks India at 164 in 
‘Enforcing Contracts’; though an improvement 
of 8 positions, it is clearly not an acceptable 
situation. 
3. Police reform until recently had been stuck 
due to various reasons. Police/law and order 
is a state subject, falling under List II of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
In a federal set up like ours, this makes policy 
reform a rather sticky issue. After accounting 
for vacant positions, there are only 137 police 
personnel per 100,000 citizens (17.3 lakh in 
all). The UN recommends 222 police personnel 
per 100,000 citizens. 
Way Forward
A. Legal reforms
1. Create a repository of all existing central and 
state laws, rules and regulations
• The centre and state(s) need to create 
repositories of laws, rules, regulations and 
government orders.
• Alternatively, a three-tier repository system 
can be considered in line with the system of 
governance enshrined in the Constitution.
37. Legal, Judicial and Police  
Reforms

179
2.  Repeal redundant laws and introduce a new 
initiative to remove restrictive clauses in existing 
laws
• For the first time since independence, as many as 
1,420 redundant laws have been repealed over 
the past four years. An identical process should 
be followed by all states.  
• A new programme to repeal unnecessarily 
restrictive clauses and procedures in existing 
laws should be started. It will enhance both 
ease of living and ease of doing business 
indices. 
3. Consider the following changes in criminal 
justice and procedural laws
• Introduce changes to procedural laws in line 
with the principles and thinking behind the 
Commercial Division Bill.
• Change from the present litigant driven outlook 
to one led by an effective judiciary in line with 
global practice. To begin with, a review of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (CPC), 1908, may be 
considered.
o The Commercial Court, Commercial 
Division and Commercial Appellate 
Division of High Courts Act, 2015, needs 
to be amended to provide for pre-
institution mediation and settlement by 
using the services of agencies created 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act. 
The amendment can be on the lines of 
the provisions of Section 89 of the CPC, 
under which Courts can refer disputes to 
one of the alternate dispute resolution 
mechanisms after a suit is filed. It is also 
necessary to fast track the consequential 
amendments in the respective provisions 
of the CPC once the Act has been 
amended.
• Reduce the criminalization of violations, and 
move towards compounding of minor offences:
o Sixty eight per cent of under-trials in jail are 
awaiting trial. The under-trial waiting time 
needs to be drastically reduced. It is also 
necessary to move towards community 
service and other non-imprisonment based 
punishments.
o It is necessary to re-examine the procedure 
for initiating criminal proceedings, arrest 
and bail. Summary proceedings and plea 
bargaining should be reorganized and 
implemented so that criminal cases can be 
settled in a time bound manner.
o Reform forensics and ballistics testing by 
outsourcing to accredited laboratories.
4. Create a law-abiding society
• It is necessary to inculcate respect for the 
rule of law among citizens. The process 
should start at the school level and can be 
effected by mandatorily introducing innovative 
programmes with well thought out content and 
activities. 
• Introduce incentive and sanction-based models 
of motivation to ensure that citizens abide 
by the law. The following measures may be 
considered:
o Prohibitive penalties should be imposed 
to check traffic violations, civic violations 
including littering in public, first time petty 
offenders, etc.
o Use of advanced technology is an essential 
pre-requisite to check these violations 
of the law; person-to-person direct 
interface should be minimized to eliminate 
corruption.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
180
o If there is a resource constraint, then 
additional resources may be allocated for 
this critical purpose.
5. A time line for implementation of necessary 
amendments should be stipulated. Such 
amendments should also have stipulated 
and binding time limits within which reports, 
such as ballistics and forensic reports, need to 
be submitted. Review and sunset clauses in 
legislations may also be considered.
6.  Continuing legal education in selected areas 
should be made mandatory for lawyers and 
judges and rules of professional conduct and 
ethics need to be drawn up and implemented.
7.  Greater sensitivity on the part of government 
officials to citizens’ needs can help reduce the 
number of litigations/disputes. This will require 
an attitudinal reorientation among government 
officials through sensitization programmes. 
Future prospects of employees can be made 
contingent on their successfully completing such 
programmes.
8.  New laws should be drafted in simple, plain 
language.
B. Judicial reforms
1.  A study carried out by the Ministry of Finance 
found that it takes, on an average, almost 
20 years for a property related dispute to be 
resolved, and that it would take 324 years just 
to clear the present backlog at the current rate 
of disposal. The huge backlog of pending cases 
is a critical logistical and efficiency issue. To 
tackle the issue, the following capacity building 
and sustainable solutions should be considered 
in consultation with the judiciary:
• Shift certain sections of the workload out of 
the regular court system to commercial courts, 
the commercial division and the commercial 
appellate division of High Courts for commercial 
disputes and the Criminal Judicial Magistrate 
for criminal cases at least in metropolitan areas 
to decongest courts.
• A mechanism may be considered whereby 
litigants in a commercial dispute must first be 
made to exhaust the remedy of pre-institution 
mediation and settlement. However, it should 
be ensured that such cases do not create one 
more stratum in litigation.
• The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996, should be amended to make India a 
robust centre for institutional arbitration, 
both domestic and international. A new 
autonomous body, viz., the Arbitration Council 
of India, should be set up to grade arbitral 
institutions and accredit arbitrators to make 
the arbitration process cost effective and 
speedy, and to pre-empt the need for court 
intervention.
• Merge and rationalize tribunals to enhance 
efficiency. Appointments to tribunals must be 
streamlined either through a specialized agency 
or under the Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT).
2.  Judicial decisions need to take account of their 
economic and social impact, especially in cases 
pertaining to contract, labour, tax, corporate 
and constitutional issues as observed by the 
Supreme Court in a recent judicial decision.   
3.  An all-India judicial services examination 
on a ranking basis can be considered to 
maintain high standards in the judiciary. The 
selection process may be entrusted to the 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for a 
cadre of lower judiciary judges (first induction 
level), Indian Legal Service (both centre and 
181
states), prosecutors, legal advisors, and legal 
draftsmen. This will attract young and bright 
law graduates and help build a new cadre that 
can enhance accountability in the governance 
system. 
4.  Continuing training may be introduced to ensure 
development of skills, ethics, knowledge and 
awareness of international best practices.
5.  Multi-faceted training faculty for judicial 
academies including reputed lawyers, successful 
NGOs and others, for holistic exposure may be 
considered.
6.  Training modules should be live streamed 
on an e-platform to make information easily 
accessible, and widely disseminated.
7.  Consider a performance index for judges and 
a separate state wise index for ease of getting 
justice.
8.  Introduce an administrative cadre in the judicial 
system to streamline processes. To maintain 
judicial independence, the cadre should report 
to the Chief Justice in each High Court.
9.  Prioritize court process automation and ICT 
enablement for electronic court and case 
management, including electronic management 
of court schedules and migration of all courts 
to the unified national court application 
software.
10. Facilitate the availability and usage of video-
conferencing facilities to assist in speedy access 
to justice and to minimize logistical issues. At 
present, even the available video conferencing 
facilities are not utilized optimally. 
C. Police reforms
With fiscal support to the states now being looked 
after under the umbrella scheme, the following 
reforms maybe considered:
1.  The Model Police Act of 2015 can serve as the 
basis for legislative reform as it modernizes 
the mandate of the police, puts in place a 
governance mechanism that insulates the 
police from political interference and provides 
for the measurement and tracking of police 
performance.
2.  A task force may be created under the Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA) to skill personnel 
and identify non-core functions that can be 
outsourced to save on staff. 
3.  States should be encouraged to ensure greater 
representation of women in the police force. The 
MHA should come up with a policy to encourage 
greater participation of women to achieve a 
target share of 30 per cent women among new 
recruits.
4.  Launch a common nation-wide emergency 
contact number to attend to emergency security 
needs of citizens. 
5.  Integrate the Lokpal and Prevention of 
Corruption Acts into police reforms to enhance 
accountability.
6.  Transfers/postings of police personnel should 
be made more transparent and the involvement 
of police in prosecution needs to be looked at 
more closely.
7.  It is important to consider introduction of 
remodelled training modules, refresher courses 
and continuing education for police personnel 
including live-streaming of training modules 
on e-platforms.  A concept of certification of 
security personnel with identified skill sets may 
be considered with linkage to promotion and 
deployment. 
8.  Introduce reform of the First Information Report 
(FIR) lodging mechanism, including introducing 
filing e-FIRs for minor offences. Besides, police 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
182
challans, investigation reports, etc., should be 
made available through the online portal of 
each police station.
9.  A separate cadre for exclusively looking into 
cyber-crimes, cyber threats and fraud needs to 
be developed. 
10. A panel of experts in psychology, negotiation, 
language proficiency and training may be put 
together.
11. A technology centre may be considered 
for benchmarking and identifying suitable 
technologies for the police under BPR&D in 
collaboration with IITs. A separate National 
Cyber Security Division may be considered 
to support and coordinate initiatives of state 
governments in handling cyber-crimes. A 
separate dashboard for interface with citizens 
for reporting and redressal of cyber crimes may 
be considered.  Besides, big data analytics may 
be utilized in a big way. The Crime and Criminal 
Tracking Network and Systems project may be 
completed along with the launch of Phase 2 for 
linking of crime, prosecution, court and prison 
databases.
183
Objective
• To put in place a reformed system of recruitment, 
training and performance evaluation of the civil 
service to ensure more effective and efficient 
delivery of public services to achieve the devel-
opment goals envisaged in New India 2022. 
Current Situation
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission 
(ARC) was constituted in 2005 and in 2009, the 
Commission submitted around 15 reports on var-
ious aspects of governance, making 1514 recom-
mendations. Of these, 1183 have been accepted by 
the central government. Decisions on the accepted 
recommendations have been sent to the relevant 
central ministries and state/union territories, with 
a request to set up an institutional mechanism to 
monitor their implementation.  However, a bulk 
of the recommendations have not yet been im-
plemented. In the meantime, the demands on the 
civil service continue to grow with the ambitious 
programmes of the government. 
Reforms in civil services are a continuous process 
and several initiatives have been taken in recent 
years by the present government. These include, 
the introduction of a multi-stakeholder feedback 
(MSF) performance evaluation, dispensing with 
interviews for lower level positions, introduction 
of online mechanisms for appraisals and filing of 
various returns by employees, implementation of 
e-office, and strengthening training and merit-based 
postings. About 18 states and 7 union territories 
have also discontinued the practice of interview for 
recruitments to lower level posts.  
Constraints
Several constraints impede the development of a 
highly efficient, transparent and accountable civil 
service.
1. There is a mismatch between positions and skill 
sets. Recruitment is not competency specific 
and often, the right person is not placed in the 
right job.
2. A related issue is the opposition to lateral 
entry, which hinders the development process. 
As the complexity of the economy increases, 
policymaking becomes a specialized activity. 
This creates an inherent need for the lateral 
entry of professionals into government service. 
3. There is a need to forecast staffing needs in 
the civil services. This could ideally be done on 
a five-year rolling basis. There are instances 
of lack of employment opportunities in some 
areas, while there are many vacancies in others.
4. Attracting talent and nurturing excellence, 
ensuring transparency and accountability 
along with participatory and representative 
decision-making are some issues that need to 
be addressed.. 
WAY FORWARD
The strategy for 2022-23 should be centred 
on the implementation of the Second ARC 
recommendations that have been accepted by 
38. Civil Services Reforms

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
184
the government. Broadly, the constraints can be 
tackled through interventions in the following 
areas: recruitment, training and evaluation, and 
governance. 
Recruitment
• Improve the teeth to tail ratio: Promote an 
officer-oriented culture and focus on expanding 
the numbers of officers.  
• Objectivity in the recruitment and placement 
process: Widely disseminate job descriptions 
and selection criterion and eliminate elements 
of arbitrariness.
• Reduce the number of civil services: The 
existing 60 plus separate civil services at the 
central and state level needs to be reduced 
through rationalization and harmonization 
of services. Recruits should be placed in a 
central talent pool, which would then allocate 
candidates by matching their competencies and 
the job description of the post. Concomitantly, 
the number of exams for civil services should 
ideally be brought down to one with all India 
ranking. States may also be encouraged to use 
this pool for recruitments.
• Encourage lateral entry: Inducting specialists at 
higher levels of government will provide much 
needed expertise. 
• Nurture specialization: The key to reform in the 
civil services is encouraging officers to cultivate 
specializations based on their education 
and skills early on in their careers. Wherever 
possible, longer tenure postings need to be 
made based on the officers’ expertise. However, 
it is also necessary to ensure cross-sector 
mobility for civil servants from areas where 
they have become surplus to areas of emerging 
importance.
• Mentorship: Upon induction, young officers 
should be assigned mentors, preferably with an 
officer having a similar functional specialization 
or with high-quality NGOs for values and soft-
skill mentorship. 
• Information Technology (IT): Use of IT needs 
to be significantly upscaled for planning, 
forecasting staffing requirements and 
recruitments.
• Hiring policies: The upper age limit for the civil 
services should be brought down to 27 years 
for the general category in a phased manner by 
2022-23. Service conditions for employees of 
autonomous bodies need to be regulated and 
harmonized.
• Strengthen municipal corporation cadres: The 
number of staff at municipal corporations 
should be increased. Measures that monitor 
performance along the same lines as proposed 
for other services, including through online 
appraisals and biometric attendance, need to 
be introduced. 
• Outsource service delivery: Efforts need to be 
made to outsource service delivery to reduce 
dependence on the administrative machinery. 
Research is needed to identify possible services 
to be outsourced; various PPP models should 
be explored to determine the best possible 
mode of outsourcing.
Training
• Reorient training: Alter the current system of 
training to meet job-outcome oriented goals. 
With economic gravity shifting towards cities, 
training should be reoriented to focus relatively 
more on managing urban areas.
• Introduce mid-career training modules for all 
services.
185
• Strengthen and leverage online avenues for 
training
o Introduce pre and post-training matching of 
skills to determine postings.
o Digitize human resource records across states.
o Develop a competency matrix to monitor 
ongoing skill acquisition and help match 
requirements with resources in real time.
o Institute an e-learning platform to conduct 
training modules.
• Mid-career exams/skill assessment might be 
undertaken to evaluate and decide on future 
postings.
• Prepare handbooks for skill orientation to 
improve competency.
• Introduce the ‘living university’ concept of value 
creation based on outcomes and good ideals. 
• Develop ongoing training and immersion 
modules on a district-by-district basis.
Evaluation
• Consider replacing annual confidential reports 
(ACRs) with multi stake holder feedback 
(MSF): ACRs could be replaced with MSF . It 
is important for MSF to be online to retain 
transparency and accountability.
• Institute goal setting and tracking: There is an 
inherent need to set key responsibility/focus 
areas and progressively reduce discretionary 
aspects to evaluate civil servants. Institute the 
online Smart Performance Appraisal Report 
Recording Online Window (SPARROW) template 
in all central and state cadres. 
• Incentivization: Review existing schemes 
and introduce new schemes of incentives for 
extraordinary performance.
• Compulsory retirement for underperforming 
officers: Develop benchmarks to assess the 
performance of officers and compulsorily retire 
those deemed unable to meet the benchmarks. 
Governance
• Citizen-centric framework: An inclusive policy 
framework with citizens at the centre needs 
to be developed. Apart from improving public 
access to information through the use of 
Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) and the Right to Information Act (RTI), the 
RTI’s management information system portal 
needs to be expanded to cover more public 
authorities, especially subordinate offices of 
ministries and public sector units.
• Institutionalize system for effective monitoring 
of suo moto disclosures: To bring further 
transparency to public affairs and adopt 
safeguards to promote accountability, effective 
monitoring of suo moto disclosures is essential. 
• Enhance capability of public authorities: The 
capabilities and knowledge base of central 
public information officers (CPIOs), appellate 
authorities (AAs) and information commissions 
need to be upgraded on a continuous basis to 
enable them to perform their assigned roles 
without external influence. 
• Protection of civil servants: Introduce an 
appropriate system of checks and balances, 
including for the process of suspension, to 
ensure that officers are given their due process 
and are not vulnerable to vested interests and 
political pressures. 
• Revisit Allocation of Business Rules (AoBR)/
Transaction of Business Rules (ToBR): Every 
ministry/department should review their AoBR/
ToBR keeping in view present day requirements.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
186
E-initiatives and Probity
• Ensure probity in governance: Strengthen 
institutional mechanisms for prevention and 
detection of corruption:
o Reviewing existing vigilance operating 
manuals and instructions to ensure probity.
o Improving transparency in placement 
through initiatives in recruitment, placement 
and training. 
o Reviewing performance of officers based on 
probity.
• Strengthen implementation of a Centralized 
Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring 
System (CPGRAMs): Develop a reform 
framework for the top twenty departments 
for periodic monitoring of grievance receipts. 
A revised version of CPGRAMS became 
operational in January 2018, which enables 
citizens to monitor the grievances lodged by 
them on a single screen. An updated version 
that enables transfer of grievances between 
ministries/departments, bulk disposal of 
grievances and multiple forwarding will be 
operational shortly. 
The Department of Administrative Reforms & 
Public Grievances (DARPG) has analysed these 
grievances, identified the top grievance prone 
areas and their root causes and recommended 
systemic reforms to bring about improvements 
in service delivery. These initiatives need to be 
continued with greater vigour and over time; 
CPGRAMs should emerge as a strong mechanism 
for efficient redressal of public grievances with 
similar mechanisms across all states/UTs.
• Implementation of e-Office
1: Implementation 
of e-Office may be expedited in all ministries/
departments; all states/UTs may also be 
encouraged to adopt it.
• Prompt delivery of services: Every department 
should seek to simplify their processes to cut 
administrative delays and ensure participatory 
feedback mechanisms for efficient service 
delivery. IT tools need to be expanded for 
single window clearances and stakeholder 
consultations in policy. 
________________________________________
1 e-Office is a mission mode project under the National e-Governance Project of the government. The product, developed by the 
National Informatics Centre (NIC), brings together independent functions and systems under a single framework to enhance 
transparency, increase accountability and transform government work culture and ethics
187
Objective
• To transform our cities into economically vibrant 
and environmentally sustainable habitats that 
provide equitable access to basic infrastructure, 
public services and opportunities to all citizens 
and platforms for democratic participation.
Current Situation
Global experience indicates that cities are central 
to raising economic productivity, enhancing job 
creation and improving public finance at all levels. 
Successful and long-lasting urban transformation 
critically depends on reforming the way our cities 
are governed. Hence, city governance is a key 
enabler for urban transformation, and sustained 
economic growth and job creation. 
India is urbanizing at a fast pace and it is 
expected that by 2050, close to 50 per cent of 
India’s population would be residing in urban 
areas, requiring the availability of sustainable 
infrastructure and services for a better quality of 
life.
1 Such infrastructure and services can only 
be ensured through modern urban governance. 
Indian cities are in the process of modernizing 
their governance structures. The government 
has undertaken various initiatives focusing on 
tourism (HRIDAY - Heritage City Development and 
Augmentation Yojana), infrastructure (Housing for 
All, Smart Cities Mission, AMRUT - Atal Mission 
for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation) and 
sanitation (Swachh Bharat Mission), among others. 
The current status of urban governance can be 
assessed through an analysis of its constraints. 
Constraints
The key challenges plaguing urban governance in 
India include the following.
• The absence of a modern spatial planning 
framework, public utility design standards 
and land titling in cities takes a huge toll 
on economic growth and productivity, 
environmental sustainability and living 
conditions in cities.   
• There is lack of human resource capacities in the 
urban sphere at all levels, especially in urban 
local bodies (ULBs). The municipalities are heavily 
under-staffed and there are significant gaps in 
the skills required for urban management.
• Indian ULBs have huge scope to improve 
their financial autonomy and capacity to raise 
resources.
2  Some of the key reasons behind the 
poor state of municipal finances are the narrow, 
inflexible and non-buoyant tax base, broken 
financial accounting and audit systems, and the 
inability of municipalities to levy and recover 
taxes and user charges. 
39. Modernizing City Governance 
For Urban Transformation

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
188
• Multiple institutions like parastatals, 
development authorities, public works 
departments, and ULBs themselves report 
to different departments of the state 
government and have been entrusted with 
overlapping responsibilities. The distribution 
of power between elected officials at the city 
level (mayors and councillors) and central 
administrative service cadres at the city/
district levels are highly tilted towards the 
latter. The 74th Constitutional Amendment 
(CAA) to decentralise urban governance has 
not translated into reality, affecting citizen 
participation in cities. 
Way Forward
The following strategies are proposed to improve 
urban governance in India by 2022-23.
1. Leveraging city economy
• Each city needs to be recognized as a distinct 
unit of the economy. In larger cities, City 
Economic Councils can serve as a clearinghouse 
between business and governments to hasten 
the progress of specific projects, improve 
the ease of doing business and catalyse 
investments into the city. 
• Concomitantly, a quarterly city dashboard 
capturing city-level investments, GDP and 
employment growth, financial position 
and financial performance, and status 
of infrastructure projects can provide a 
framework for data-driven decisions. This 
will measure transformation and encourage 
competition among cities. For this, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA), the Ministry of Finance and 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation may create frameworks for 
a dashboard subsuming scheme-specific 
performance MIS.
2. Decentralization and metropolitan 
governance
• The multiplicity of agencies with overlapping 
jurisdictions and fragmented roles and 
Figure 39.1: Key strategies to improve urban governance by 2022-23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City Economy 
Decentralization 
Spatial Planning 
ULB Finance 
Capacity 
Building 
Citizen 
Participation 
189
responsibilities is common in Indian cities. This 
leads to delays in implementation of projects 
and inefficient service delivery. To achieve the 
decentralization goals of 74th CAA, there is an 
urgent need for articulating a framework for 
governance of cities that includes development 
authorities, other parastatals, special purpose 
vehicles (SPVs) and Census Towns. 
• Metropolitan governance systems are also 
needed in million-plus cities. There is a strong 
case for having a two-tier governance structure 
where all local functions are transferred to the 
ward committees and citywide services, such 
as transportation, water supply, sewerage, 
etc., are vested with the city council or regional 
authorities. 
• Moreover, state governments can be 
encouraged to transfer 12th Schedule funds, 
functions and functionaries to the ULBs. At the 
same time, governance should be devolved 
to the ward and area levels to enhance 
downstream accountability mechanisms. 
States can learn from innovative governance 
frameworks involving the ULB and the state 
government as seen in models like the Greater 
Shimla Water Supply and Sewerage Circle.
3. Spatial planning and land titling
• There is urgent need for a synchronous and 
modern national framework for the spatial 
planning of cities that replaces the current 
Urban Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation (UDPFI) guidelines. This 
framework should factor in plan preparation, 
implementation and enforcement at 
metropolitan, municipal and ward levels. It 
should also include congruent endpoints, pre-
defined success measures and a transparent 
mechanism for consultative modification.  
• Guaranteed land titling may also be evaluated 
to foster a transparent land market. In this 
regard, cities should lay out their own action 
plans to provide infrastructure and formalize 
existing settlements of the underprivileged.
4. Strengthening finances of ULBs and civic 
agencies 
• Cities require a financial sustainability roadmap 
to be financially self-sufficient to support 
high-quality infrastructure and the delivery of 
services. 
• This comprises fiscal decentralization, medium-
term fiscal plans, innovative models to improve 
revenue collection, optimizing return on assets 
especially land and buildings, value capture 
methods, market-oriented revenue models, 
PPPs in urban infrastructure and services, and 
financial accountability through audited balance 
sheets and performance MIS reports. 
• MoHUA, in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance, may draw up model provisions for 
consideration by states in their municipal and 
civic agency acts. 
5. Capacity building by skilling for municipal 
jobs and strengthening institutions 
• There is huge potential for the creation of direct 
and indirect skilled jobs in ULBs to improve the 
quality of infrastructure and services and the 
management of ULBs. MoHUA will develop 
model municipal talent and in/outsourcing 
guidelines to leverage efficiencies generated by 
technology and outsourcing. 
• The National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) should be leveraged to improve 
understanding of municipal jobs including 
job definitions, technical competencies and 
key result areas, which can be considered for 
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
190
inclusion in recruitment rules at the state level 
and for performance standards/accreditation 
for training institutes to foster a functional 
platform for knowledge sharing. A separate 
sector skill council for municipal services may be 
considered. 
6. Citizen participation 
• Enhanced citizen participation is needed for 
greater trust between citizens and governments, 
improved sustainability, better service delivery 
and accountability. Ward committees and area 
sabhas should be activated with a technology-
enabled ‘Open Cities Framework’ and the use of 
digital tools for feedback and reporting. 
• ULBs should also encourage the participation 
of all community associations, including 
settlements of the underprivileged and civil 
society organizations. ULBs should engage 
with them frequently through city watch 
groups, public hearings and city consultations 
to create a framework for formal partnerships. 
Rules and procedures need to be simplified 
for faster implementation of constructive 
recommendations. 
________________________________________
1 Reforms to Accelerate the Development of India’s Smart Cities Shaping the Future of Urban Development & Services, World Economic 
Forum, 2016.
2 High Powered Expert Committee (HPEC) for Estimating the Investment Requirements for Urban Infrastructure Services, 2012.
191
Objectives
Ensuring that land markets function smoothly, 
through efficient allocation of land across uses, 
provision of secure property rights and titles, 
and clear and consistent regulations around the 
operations, leasing and sale of land are critical for 
India to achieve and sustain high economic growth. 
To this end, the following goals have to be achieved 
by 2022-23:
• Legalise and ease land leasing. 
• Consolidate fragmented plots of farmers to 
enhance efficiency and equity.
• Create a digitized and integrated land records 
system that is easily accessible in all states.
• Increase efficiency in the management of forest 
land.
• Convert waste and fallow land to productive 
uses.
40. Optimizing the Use of Land  
Resources
Figure 40.1: Land use across different uses in India, 1990-91 to 2013-14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67.7 69.8 71.8 
21.2 23.7 26.9 
19.5 17.4 16.9 
11.4 10.6 10.2 
185.1 183.4 181.8 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
1990-91 2000-01 2013-14
Thousands of Hectares 
Agricultural, Cultivable,
Culturable & Arable
Land
Permanent pastures &
other grazing lands
Barren & Unculturable
Land
Non-Agricultural Uses
Forests
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers’ Welfare
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
192
• Strengthen property rights, especially 
community rights over forest land.
Current Situation
As measured by the land-to-population ratio, India 
is one of the most land scarce countries in the 
world. Agriculture accounts for the bulk of land 
use although the sector contributed only 17.45 
per cent of value added to gross domestic product 
(GDP) in 2015. There has been a sharp fall in the 
average farm size from 2.28 ha in 1970-71 to 1.15 
ha in 2010-11.
1 
The total recorded forestland in India is 76.4 
million hectares, which is about 23.3 per cent of 
the total geographical area. Although it has more 
than one-fifth of its land under forest cover, Indian 
forests contribute only 6.4 per cent of the demand 
for wood.
2  Property rights over forestlands can be 
strengthened. The passing of the Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights Act (FRA)), which provides 
individual as well as community rights over forests 
and allows local communities/ gram sabhas to 
protect and manage their customary forests on a 
sustainable basis, is a step forward.
At the same time, there is an imperative need to 
make land available to meet the needs of a fast 
expanding economy and rising population with a 
greater thrust on vertical development. 
Constraints
• Restrictive agricultural tenancy laws: 
Agricultural tenancy laws passed by various 
state governments between the 1950s and 
1970s are highly restrictive. 
o Conditions on leasing: While the states 
of Kerala and Jammu & Kashmir prohibit 
leasing out agricultural land without any 
exception, states such as Bihar, Telangana, 
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Tripura, Karnataka and Himachal Pradesh 
allow leasing out only by certain disabled 
categories of landowners, such as 
physically and mentally handicapped 
persons, persons from the defence services, 
minors, widows, etc. 
o Lack of ease in leasing: In other states, 
there is no explicit ban on land leasing, but 
there are restrictive clauses that discourage 
landowners from leasing out land.
o High informal tenancy: Due to legal 
restrictions, many landowners prefer to 
keep land fallow rather than lease it out, 
fearing they may lose their land rights for 
illegally leasing out land. At the same time, 
as market forces drive land leasing, there is 
informal tenancy in several places. Informal 
tenants do not have either security of 
tenure or access to institutional credit, 
insurance and disaster relief. As a result, 
productivity on tenanted land suffers.
• Small sized land parcels: Landholdings in 
India are small and highly fragmented, which 
not only results in diseconomies of scale, but 
also makes the task of irrigation management 
and land improvement difficult. Punjab, 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra have 
completed their first round of consolidation, but 
further sub-division and fragmentation of land 
have necessitated reconsolidation. The progress 
in other states is either nil or negligible.
• Productivity of forestland: There has been 
no systematic effort to increase the area and 
productivity of forests on a sustainable basis. 
One important reason is the lack of human 
resources. The number of forest officials for 
193
management of both timber and non-timber 
forest resources is lacking relative to the size of 
forests.
• Absence of conclusive titling and records: 
Deficient land records and lack of conclusive 
land title result in costly litigation and adversely 
affects investment and economic growth.
Way Forward
1. Agricultural Land
• States may consider the Model Land Leasing 
Act, 2016. Further details on land leasing are 
given in the chapter on Agriculture.
• Consolidate smaller plots of land through 
pooling to enhance productivity. The 
consolidation of fragmented landholdings 
is essential to exploit scale economies and 
increase farm incomes. Pooling the land of 
willing farmers and organizing them into land 
shares or joint stock companies will allow 
farmers to earn dividends based on their equity 
shares. Farmers will also earn wages/salaries as 
an employee based on agricultural output.
2. Increase efficiency around the management 
of forest land
• Implement effectively the Forest Rights Act 
(FRA) in all states to strengthen the property 
rights of forest dwellers, tribal populations and 
local communities.
• Zone land on a priority basis to clearly 
demarcate forest and revenue lands. 
• Bring more area under agro forestry using 
wasteland, non-cultivable fallow lands, etc. 
• Revisit the policy on tree-felling. Encourage 
trees as a resource for farmers especially by 
easing restriction on certain species of trees. 
Current restrictions on inter-state and inter-
district movement of wood should also be 
removed.  
3. Updating and modernization of land record 
systems
• Beyond creating and maintaining land records, 
efforts must be made to update and digitize 
these records in a user-friendly manner. 
The National Land Records Modernization 
Programme (NLRMP), now Digital India Land 
Records Modernization Programme, aims to 
develop a well-functioning and transparent 
electronic land records management system 
that will provide easy access to all available 
and relevant information to give a fair 
comprehensive position of any plot of land to 
the landowner, concerned officers/agencies 
and interested persons/entrepreneurs. This will 
improve real-time information on land, optimise 
use of land resources, benefit landowners and 
prospectors, assist in policy and planning, 
reduce land disputes and check fraudulent/
benami transactions.
• While most states have started digitizing their 
records, all states must have digitized textual 
as well as spatial records so that they are 
easily available and verifiable. In this area, 
commendable efforts have been made by the 
states of Karnataka and Gujarat. It will also be 
desirable to link the land record database with 
banks.
• Other states should review their progress in 
terms of digitization and move toward complete 
and accessible up-to-date records. In due 
course, states may move towards conclusive 
land titling.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
194
4. Initiating Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) 
for wasteland development
• Cultural wastelands, estimated at about 
12 million ha, need to be improved and 
productively utilized as a potential resource. 
• This can be done either by 
gram panchayats 
with financial support from states/union 
government or through PPPs, with clearly laid 
down procedures and norms.
• Strengthen property rights, plan urbanization 
and prevent land degradation.
• Define and identify common land, along with 
details of ownership, control and use rights.
• Recognize the customary land tenure system 
including community ownership in tribal areas.
• Remove encroachments on public land to 
ensure that land is used efficiently.
• Free estimated ceiling surplus land of over 1 
lakh acres that has been under litigation for 
several years through speedy disposal of cases.
• Define and demarcate revenue and forestland, 
including land used for shifting cultivation.
• Plan urbanization as per master plans with 
greater emphasis on vertical growth.
• Prevent land degradation and soil erosion 
through policies that promote fertilization and 
organic farming.
5. Using land as resource to finance urban 
development
• Tools such as land value capture, incentive 
zoning, town planning schemes, and land-
based taxes like land value tax, vacant land tax, 
land value increment tax, etc., can be used to 
finance rapid and efficient urbanization. 
________________________________________
1 Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers’ Welfare “Land Use Statistics at a 
Glance-State Wise” http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/LUS_1999_2004.htm. Accessed April 20, 2018.
2 State of Forest Report 2011, Forest Survey of India.
195
Objectives
Evidence based policy making should be made 
integral to the overall governance structure in New 
India, 2022-23. To achieve this, timely generation 
and dissemination of robust data at all levels of 
governance would be a pre-requisite. This would 
require: 
• Collecting data for new measurable parameters 
using latest technologies. 
• Improving efficiencies in processes related 
to existing data collection by government 
departments and agencies.
• Expanding warehousing facilities for storing and 
integrating data from different sources.
• Making data available for industry practitioners, 
academicians, researchers, etc., wherever 
feasible.
• Integrating data analysis and interactive data 
visualization into all policy formulation.
Current Situation
Background
Countries, where large-scale developmental 
efforts are needed, require their policy delivery 
mechanisms to be robust and efficient. However, 
paradoxically, these countries have very little data 
needed for the selection, implementation and 
evaluation of effective policies.1 In India, decision-
making is often based on surveys and consultations 
that are released with a considerable lag. For e.g., 
the population census comes out once in ten years; 
the latest National Family Health Survey – 4 was 
released in 2015-16 after a period of 10 years.
Rapid advancements in technology have led to an 
explosive growth in the volume of data produced. 
Data is now being touted as one of the most 
valuable resources. Given the proprietary access 
to high value data sources, public services and 
governance systems in India can better harness the 
value of this data. 
Statistical system in India
At the government level, various ministries/
departments of the Government of India, state 
governments and the Office of the Registrar General 
& Census Commissioner under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs collect data. One important step taken 
towards creating the availability of non-sensitive 
data for public consumption on a common platform 
was the launch of National Data Sharing and 
Accessibility Policy (NDSAP) in 2012. The objective
2  
of the policy was to “increase the accessibility and 
easier sharing of non-sensitive data amongst the 
registered users and their availability for scientific, 
economic and social developmental purposes”. 
This led to the creation of the Open Government 
Data initiative where the domain data.gov.in was 
registered in 2012. It is now one of the important 
pillars of the Digital India programme.
41. Data Led Governance and  
Policy Making

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
196
As stated by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoS&PI),3 central 
ministries/departments or state government 
departments that are responsible for an area/
subject are usually the key agencies for collecting 
the statistics for that domain. The usual flow of 
statistical information is from states to the centre 
except in cases where the operations are part of 
centrally sponsored schemes or when the data is 
collected through national sample surveys. Viewed 
from the national level, the Indian statistical 
system at the centre is laterally decentralized 
between the ministries and departments while the 
vertical represented by each ministry is vertically 
decentralized between the centre and the states. 
A similar decentralized structure exists at the state 
levels, which have lateral decentralization at the 
state department level and vertical decentralization 
at the district level. In addition, statistical offices 
at the central and state levels, i.e., the Central 
Statistics Office (CSO) and the Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics (DESs) respectively, bring 
together all statistics related to India and examine 
various aspects including quality, accuracy, and 
timeliness. 
The need for evidence-based policymaking has 
been recognised for years now. Five-year plans 
in the past have stressed the need for frequent 
and robust data collection processes in various 
contexts ranging from health to natural calamities 
to agriculture. The Report of the Dr. Rangarajan 
Commission in 2001 also acknowledges the 
increased need for data in the decision-making 
process.
4 
Constraints 
The following constraints need to be overcome to 
enable India’s transition to a data-led governance 
structure.
• There is over-reliance on data collection through 
surveys. These are released at a considerable 
lag, which diminishes their usefulness in 
policymaking. There is a dearth of availability of 
real time operational/administrative data.
o One challenge in this regard is that 
considerable numbers of stakeholders are 
involved in enabling data collection systems 
that are premised on a “bottom-to-top” 
approach. It will be a huge challenge to 
get all these stakeholders on board for a 
streamlined data collection and reporting 
mechanism as envisaged for 2022-23.
• There is a problem with the usability of data 
that is currently generated.
o Large volumes of data collected by 
different government agencies and 
departments are not shared, even among 
the departments.
o The data shared is often not available in 
machine readable format or cannot be 
integrated with data from other sources to 
help develop multi-dimensional insights.
o Enabling adoption of the latest technology 
at the grassroots level would involve 
substantial investment along with skill 
development of local functionaries.
o Furthermore, planning will be required to 
integrate different technologies so that 
ground level data can be aggregated.
• Lastly, there is considerable lack of awareness 
regarding currently available data sources.
Way Forward 
The following framework, which focuses on the key 
aspects requiring intervention, needs to be enabled 
by 2022-23 to achieve transparent governance:
197
Data collection methods should be streamlined 
through the following measures:
• Both administrative and survey data need to 
be collected in digital formats across various 
sectors in real time to move from paper based 
to digitally driven operations. This would 
require the adoption of latest technologies that 
require recording in digital format, geo-tagging 
etc. This will address the issues related to time 
lags, data cleansing, etc., associated with 
surveys to a large extent.
• Ensure availability of data at a more granular 
level – village/block/district. NITI Aayog is 
already engaged in developing a National Data 
Analytics Portal, which is envisioned as a central 
repository for real-time data across different 
sectors for all states/UTs.
• Enable data sharing in real time through 
Application Programming Interfaces (API) 
between data stored across different databases 
and across ministries in a central location for 
easy access by the public.
The following specific steps will ensure that the 
above objectives are achieved.
1. Data integration and quality assurance
 Most of the administrative and survey data are 
generated at the state level. It is recommended 
that after going through the process of quality 
assurance, where discrepancies are removed, 
and formats are standardized, the data should 
be integrated in a state data repository. This 
process should be followed by all states 
based on guidelines drawn up by the central 
government. 
 Reliable and timely data is essential for 
evidence-based policy making, which should be 
the norm. Necessary reform of our statistics and 
Figure 41.1: Framework for achieving transparent governance
Figure 1: Framework for achieving transparent governance 
 
 
 
 
Data collection methods should be streamlined through the following measures: 
 
 Both administrative and survey data need to be collected in digital formats across various 
sectors in real  time to move from paper based to digitally driven operations . This would 
require the adoption of latest technologies that require recording in digital format, geo-tagging 
etc. This will address the issues related to time lags, data cleansing , etc., associated with 
surveys to a large extent. 
 Ensure availability of data at a more granular level  – village/block/district. NITI Aayog is 
already engaged in developing a National Data Analytics Portal, which is envisioned as a 
central repository for real-time data across different sectors for all states/UTs. 
 Enable data sharing in real  time through Application Programming Interfaces (API) between 
data stored across different databases and across ministries in a central location for easy 
access by the public. 
 

Strategy for 
New India @ 75
198
data collection system must be undertaken as 
soon as possible to achieve this objective.
 Some state governments like Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, and Rajasthan have taken important 
steps to leverage technology for evidence-based 
policymaking. However, these steps need to be 
further streamlined and adopted by all states. 
This will empower the officer on the ground to 
take data led decisions. This aspect forms an 
integral part of the Digital Transformation Index 
being instituted by NITI Aayog. Measures to 
leverage technology for informed policymaking 
will be implemented in a time bound manner 
and closely monitored for desired results.
2. Data protection
 The issue of confidentiality will need to be 
ensured while dealing with citizen level data. 
The Justice Sri Krishna Committee Report 
submitted its recommendation in July 2018. Its 
recommendations are under active consideration 
to formulate a data protection law in India.
3. Role of tertiary big data
 For better governance and evidence-based 
policymaking, it is recommended that tertiary 
big data collected by private third parties 
should be used. Over time, the National Data 
Analytics Portal aims at collecting, analysing 
and disseminating various types of tertiary data 
of different levels of granularity. 
4. Skill development and restructuring
 Government statistical organizations 
responsible for data collection and reporting 
need to be updated on new technologies. 
Data scientists with multiple skills in the 
areas of statistics, analytics, computer science 
and programming are rare in the Indian 
government. MoS&PI needs to have an 
adequate number of data scientists to take 
advantage of new technologies. Re-skilling 
needs to be promoted across government 
agencies, both at the state level and at the 
centre. A roadmap for strengthening various 
government agencies including MoS&PI needs 
to be formulated and implemented in a time 
bound manner. 
________________________________________
1 http://live.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/Big%20Data%20for%20Development%20Report_final%20version.pdf. Accessed April 20, 
2018.
2 http://www.dst.gov.in/national-data-sharing-and-accessibility-policy-0. Accessed April 22, 2018.
3 http://www.mospi.gov.in/142-present-indian-statistical-system-organisation. Accessed April 25, 2018.
4 http://mospi.nic.in/11-background. Accessed April 30, 2018.
199
Agriculture
• Shri A. J. Tharakan, Member, Seafood Exporters 
Association of India
• Shri Ajay Kumar, Adviser, Merino Group
• Shri Anand Kothadiya Krishiratna, Extension 
Activist, Sahaydri Farmers Producer 
Organisation
• Dr. Ashwini Mahajan, Co-Convener, Swadeshi 
Jagran Manch
• Shri B. Ramarao, Farmer Representative, Andhra 
Pradesh
• Dr. B Venkateswarlu, Vice-Chancellor, Vasantrao 
Naik Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth
• Shri Balbir Singh Rajewal, President, Bharatiya 
Kisan Union
• Ms. Chhaya Bhavsar, Senior Coordinator, ASHA
• Shri D. Bhuyan, Director, SFAC
• Dr. Gopal Naik, Professor & Dean Faculty,  
IIM- Bangalore
• Dr. GV Srinivasan, Scientist, Spices Board
• Ms. Ishira Mehta, Director & Co-Founder, Crop 
Connect Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. 
• Shri Ishwar Lal Patidar, Chairman, Rajya Krishi 
Aayog, Madhya Pradesh
• Shri Jalees, Researcher, Navdanya
• Shri Joy P Joseph, Spice Farmer, Kerala
• Kiran Vissa, National Co-Convener, ASHA
• Shri K. K. Agarwal, Farmer Representative, 
Madhya Pradesh
• Shri Krishan Bir Chaudhary, President,  
Bharatiya Krishak Samaj
• Shri Kuldeep Singh Brar,  
Farmer Representative, Punjab
• Shri Lalit Deora, Farmer Representative, 
Rajasthan
• Shri P . Srinivas, Member, Warehousing 
Development & Regulatory Authority (WDRA)
• Dr. PK Joshi, Director, South Asia, IFPRI
• Shri Prakash Lohia, MD, Merino Industries Ltd
• Shri Pravesh Sharma, Founder & CEO, 
Sabziwala.com
• Prof. Anil Kumar Singh, Vice-Chancellor, 
Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi 
Vishwavidyalaya
• Shri Puneet Jhajharia, Director & Co-Founder, 
Crop Connect Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. 
• Shri Raghunath Patil, Shetkari Sangathan, 
Maharashtra State
• Dr. Rajaram Tripathi, National Convener,  
All India Farmers Alliance
Annex 1
During the preparation of this document, the NITI Aayog consulted extensively with groups of 
scientists, think tanks, voluntary organizations, industry, agriculture and labour. This Annex provides a 
comprehensive list of these outside experts and organizations. Any omissions are inadvertent.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
200
• Shri Rajkumar Singh Hajari, Farmer 
Representative, Karnataka
• Shri Ramesh Kumar Yadav, Chairman,  
Haryana Farmers Commission
• Shri Rampal Jat, National President,  
Kisan Mahapanchayat
• Shri RG Agarwal, Chairman,  
Dhanuka Agritech Ltd. 
• Shri RS Sodhi, MD, Amul
• Dr. Sandeep Kumar, Haryana State Farmers 
Commission
• Dr. Shanti Swarup Khanna, Former Adviser 
(Agriculture), Planning Commission
• Shri Sharad Marathe, UTS
• Ms. Smita Bhatnagar, Senior Coordinator, ASHA
• Shri Tshering Gyatso Lepcha,  
Spice Farmer, Sikkim
• Shri Tushar Jagtap, Senior Manager, Sahaydri 
Farmers Producer Organisation
• Shri V . Ravichandra, Farmer Representative, 
Tamil Nadu
• Shri Veerpal Singh, Farmer Representative,  
Uttar Pradesh
• Shri Vijay Pratap Singh Aditya, CEO, EkGaon
• Shri Vikas Chaudhary, Farmer Representative, 
Haryana
• Shri Vilas Shinde, MD, Sahaydri Farms Producer 
Company Ltd. 
• Ms. Vimla Sihag, Farmer Representative, 
Rajasthan
• Dr. Vinod Kumar Bhatt, Executive Director, 
Navdanya
• Dr. VL Patil, President,  
Bharatiya Krishak Samaj – Vidharbha
Services Sector  
• Shri Ajay Singh, CMD, Spicejet
• Shri Ajit Gulabchand, CMD, HCC Ltd
• Shri Aroon Purie, Chairman, India Today Group
• Shri Arun Maira, former Chairman, Boston 
Consulting Group India
• Shri Aseem Chauhan, Chancellor, Amity 
Education Society
• Shri Ashish Chauhan, CEO, BSE
• Shri Bharat Anand, Senior Partner, Khaitan & Co.
• Shri Bharat Joshi, Director,  Trac1 Logistics Joshi-
Konoike Transport & Infrastructure
• Shri Bipin P Singh, Founder, Mobikwik
• Shri Deep Kalra, Founder & CEO,  
makemytrip.com
• Shri Kamal Hingorani, SVP , Spicejet
• Shri Kandula, Grant Thornton
• Ms. Kanika Tekriwal, CEO, JetSetGo
• Shri Nikhil Sahni, Head - Government & Branch 
Banking, Yes Bank
• Shri Prabodh Thakker, Chairman,  
Global Insurance
• Shri Raghav Bahl, Founder, The Quint
• Shri Raghav Verma, Co-Founder, Chaayos
• Shri Rahul Bhasin, Managing Partner, Baring 
Private Equity Partners
201
• Shri Rahul Vatts, Senior VP , Idea Cellular
• Shri Rajat Mukarji, CCAO, Idea Cellular
• Shri Rajeev Talwar, CEO, DLF
• Shri Rajnish Wahi, Senior Vice President, 
Snapdeal
• Shri Ranji Dua, Chairman, Dua Associates
• Shri Soumya Palchoudhuri, Yes Bank
• Shri Sunil K Goyal, MD & Fund Manager,  
Your Nest Venture Capital
• Shri Suresh Senapaty, Wipro
• Shri Utsav Somani, Partner, Angelist India
• Shri Vikesh Mehta, Grant Thornton
Manufacturing Sector
• Shri Adesh Gupta, CEO, Liberty Group & 
Chairman, Council For Footwear, Leather and 
Accessories (CFLA)
• Shri Dilip G Shah, Secretary General, Indian 
Pharmaceutical Alliance
• Shri Dinesh Aggarwal, Joint MD,  
Anchor Electricals
• Shri Eshwar K Vikas, CEO, Mukunda Foods
• Shri Gautam Nair, MD, Matrix Clothing (P) Ltd.
• Shri G.K. Raman, Group President Corporate 
Affairs, Arvind Textiles Ltd.
• Shri Harsh Mariwala, Chairman, Marico Ltd.
• Ms. Ishita Dey, Chief Project Manager,  
Economic Times
• Shri Jagdish Khattar, Founder, Carnation Auto
• Shri Mahendra Singhi, CEO (Cement), Dalmia 
Cement (Bharat) Ltd.
• Shri Manish Chaturvedi, MD & CEO, Indus 
Strategy
• Shri Manish Mishra, Chief Regulatory Affairs, 
Tata Steel
• Shri Manish Sharma, CEO, Panasonic India
• Ms. Meghana Narayan, Founder, Slurrp Farm
• Shri Narasimha Hegde, Vice President, Ashok 
Leyland Limited
• Ms. Nidhi Saxena, CEO, Zoctr
• Shri Om Prakash Lohia, CMD, Indorama 
Synthetics
• Shri Probir Das, MD, Terumo India Private 
Limited
• Shri Rajesh Shah, CMD, Mukund Iron and Steel
• Shri Ramakrishna NK, CEO, Rang De
• Shri Ramesh Ramachandran, Senior Vice 
President, Strategy & Precision Farming 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.
• Shri Roshan Lal Tamak, Executive Director, 
Sugar DCM Shriram
• Shri Sahil Malik, MD, Da Milano
• Shri Sanjay Modi, MD, APAC & Middle East 
Monster.com
• Shri Shailesh Pathak, CEO, L&T Infrastructure 
Development Project
• Shri Subrata Biswas, Director (Engineering, 
Research & Development), BHEL
• Shri Vedant Jhaver, CEO, Jhaver Group
• Shri Vijay Iyer, MD, Rio Tinto India
• Ms. Vinita Sethi, Senior Vice President, Apollo 
Hospitals
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
202
Civil Society Organisations
• Shri Aloysius P . Fernandes, Secretary, MYRADA
• Shri Aditya Patnaik, Antodya Chetana Mandal
• Shri Akhil Dobhal, Sr. Manager, Prayas
• Shri Amod Kanth, General Secretary, Prayas
• Dr. Ashok Khosla, Chairman, Development 
Alternatives
• Shri Ashwath Bhatt, Jt. Secretary,  
H. N. Wanchoo Trust
• Dr. Bindeshwar Pathak, Founder,  
Sulabh International
• Shri Harish Hande, CEO, Selco
• Dr. Indumathi Rao, Regional Adviser, CBR 
Network, Bengaluru
• Dr. J. Paul Bhaskar, Chairman, Peace Trust
• Dr. Lalit Kumar, Sr. Vice President,  
Sulabh International
• Dr. Madhav Chavan, Director, Pratham 
Education Foundation
• Shri Manas Satpathy, Pradan
• Shri Nachiket Mor, Bill & Melinda Gate 
Foundation (BMGF)
• Shri Neichute Duolo, CEO, Enterprises 
Associates
• Shri Prabhat Pani, TATA Trust
• Shri Pradip Kumar Sarmah, Executive Director, 
Centre for Rural Development
• Shri Rajan Bahadur, MD & CEO, CARE India
• Dr. Rajesh Tandon, President, PRIA
• Shri Ratna Mathur. Dy. Programme Director, 
CARE India
• Shri Ravi Pokharna, Executive Head (Projects), 
Rambhau Mhalgi Prabhodhini, Delhi
• Shri Ravindra Gajbhiye, Activist, Sampoorna 
Bamboo Kendra, Melghat, Maharahtra
• Shri Ravindra Sathe, Executive Director, 
Rambhau Mhalgi Prabhodhini, Mumbai
• Dr. R. C. Jha, Scientist, Sulabh International
• Shri Rohit Choudhary, Regional Director
• Shri Santhosh Gupta, CEO, Indian Social 
Responsibility Network (ISRN)
• Shri Shashi Bhushan, Chairman, SATHI-UP
• Shri Shubham Oswal, Programme Head. Water 
& Environment, Green Energy Foundation
• Shri Srikanth Viswanathan, CEO, Janaagraha
• Shri Surendra Kulkarni, Member (Director),  
Seva Bharati Purbanchal
• Ms. Bhavana Luthra, Executive Director,  
LEAD India
• Ms. Puja Marwaha, CRY
• Ms. Sandhya Venkateswaran,  
Dy. Director, BMGF
• Ms. Sharmila Oswal, President, Green Energy 
Foundation
• Ms. Shatabdi Pande, Executive Member, 
Chhattisgarh Mahila Manch
• Dr. S. Chatterjee, Executive President, Sulabh 
International
• Dr. Vijay Mahajan, CEO, BASIX
203
Scientists and Innovators
• Shri Amit Mishra, GM, Piramal Water Pvt. Ltd.
• Prof. Anil Gupta, National Innovation 
Foundation
• Shri Arjun P . Gupta, Founder & CEO,  
(Energy Management), Smart Joules
• Shri Chander Shekhar, SCI(G), ICMR, New Delhi
• Dr. H. Purushottam, CMD, National Research 
Development Corporation
• Dr. K.D. Nayak, Former Chief Controller, R&D 
(MED & MIST), DRDO
• Shri Karunakara M. Reddy,  Smart India Pvt. Ltd
• Ms. Poyni Bhatt, CEO, Sine IIT - B
• Shri Pradeep Mehta, Head Finance & Legal, 
Finance & Legal F/A Technology
• Shri Premkumar  Seshadri, HCL Info systems
• Dr. Raghunath Mashelkar, Former DG, CSIR
• Shri Rajeev Kher,  Saraplast
• Dr. S.K. Sarin,  Director, ILBS
• Shri Sandeep Goenka, Zebpay
• Shri Sanjeev Malhotra, CEO, IOT Centre of 
Excellence, NASSCOM
• Shri Shishir K. Jha. Asstt. Professor, IIT Bombay
• Shri Sudesh Menon, WaterLife
• Prof. Supriyo Mitra, Dean, IISER, Kolkata
• Dr. T . Mohapatra, DG, ICAR
• Shri Vignesh Subrahmanian, Lead Scientist, GE 
Global Research
• Dr. Vijay Bhatkar, Chancellor, Nalanda University
• Prof. Vijay Chandru,  Co-Founder,  
Strand Life Sciences
Labour Representatives and Trade 
Unions
• Shri Ajit K Ghose, Institute of Human 
Development
• Shri AK Sahu, ESIC
• Shri Alakh Sharma, Institute for Human 
Development
• Shri Arup Mitra, DG NILERD
• Prof. Chinmay Tumbe, IIM-A
• Shri GB Gawde, Indian National Trade Union 
Congress
• Prof. Jeemol Unni, Ahmedabad University
• Ms. Kamal Gaur, Save the Children
• Ms. Manali Shah, SEWA
• Ms. Nayana Mallapurkar, Tata Institute of Social 
Sciences
• Ms. Neelam Chibber, Industree Foundation
• Dr. Nomaan Majid, ILO
• Shri Saji Narayanan C.K., BMS
• Shri Sanjay Singh, Tata Sons
• Shri Sanjeev Bikhchandani, Naukri.com
• Shri Santosh Mehrotra, JNU
• Prof. Shalini Bharat, Tata Institute of Social 
Sciences
• Dr. Sher Verick, ILO
• Dr. S K Sasikumar, VV Giri National Labour 
Institute
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
204
• Ms. Sudipta Bhadra, ILO
• Shri Sunil Rana, Mercer - Global Consulting 
Practice & Public Sector 
• Shri Yoginder Alagh, Economist
Think Tanks
• Dr. A Ganeshkumar, Professor, IGIDR  
• Shri Ajay Lele, Senior Fellow, IDSA  
• Dr. Amit Chandra, Associate Director,  
Centre for Civil Society  
• Dr. Anant Sudarshan, India Director,  
Energy Policy Institute at  
• Dr. Anirban Ganguly, Director, Shyama Prasad 
Mukherjee Research  
• Dr. Anshu Bharadwaj, Director, CSTEP  
• Shri Arghya Sengupta, Research Director, Vidhi 
Centre for Legal Policy  
• Ms. Bindu Ananth, Chair, IFMR  
• Dr. Errol D’Souza, Director-in-Charge,  
IIM-Ahmedabad  
• Dr. Harsha Vardhana Singh, Executive Director, 
Brookings India  
• Shri Harshit Sehgal, Senior Director,  
Ananta Centre  
• Dr. Jaydeep Mukherjee, Faculty, IIFT  
• Dr. KR Shanmugam, Director, Madras School of 
Economics  
• Dr. Navroz Dubash, Senior Fellow, CPR  
• Dr.Pradeep Apte, Professor, Gokhale Institute of 
Politics & Economics  
• Shri Prashant Girbane, Director, Pune 
International Centre  
• Dr. Pravarkar Sahoo, Professor, IEG  
• Dr. Radhicka Kapoor, Fellow, ICRIER  
• Shri Rajesh Chakraborty, Co-Founder,  
Sunay Policy Advisory  
• Dr. Rupa Chanda, Professor, IIM-Bangalore 
• Ms. Rwitwika Bhattacharya, CEO,  
Swaniti Initiative  
• Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi, DG, RIS  
• Shri Saket Mishra, India Foundation  
• Shri Saurabh Chandra, Fellow, Takshashila 
Institution  
• Dr. Seeta Prabhu, Tata Chair Professor, TISS 
• Dr. Shakti Sinha, Director, Nehru Memorial 
Museum & Library  
• Dr. Shekhar Shah, DG, NCAER  
• Dr. Sumeet Bhasin, Director, PPRC
• Shri Sunjoy Joshi, Chair, ORF
205
Employment and Labour Reforms
• Dr. Ajit Ghose, Visiting Professor, Institute of 
Human Development 
• Secretary General, Social Security Association of 
India
• Self-Employment Women’s Association
• Dr. Alakh N. Sharma, Professor & Director, 
Institute for Human Development
• Dr. Jeemol Unni, Expert on Employment, IRMA
• President, Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh
• President, Indian National Trade Union 
Congress
• Dr. S. K. Sasikumar, Senior Fellow,  
V . V . Giri National Labour Institute
• Employment Specialist, International Labour 
Organisation (ILO)
• Shri Amod K. Kanth, Prayas Juvenile Aid Centre
• Dr. Prabhu P . Mohapatra, Delhi University
• Prof. Aditya Bhattacharjea, Delhi School of 
Economics
Technology and Innovation
• Dr. Raghunath Mashelkar, Former DG, CSIR 
• Shri Vignesh Subrahmanian, Lead Scientist, GE 
Global Research 
• Dr K. D. Nayak, Former Chief Controller, R&D 
(MED & MIST), DRDO 
• Dr T . Mohapatra,  DG, ICAR 
• Ms. Poyni Bhatt, CEO, Sine IIT - B  
• Shri Rajeev Kher, Saraplast 
• Shri Sandeep Goenka, Zebpay 
• Shri Karunakara M Reddy, Smart India Pvt Ltd 
• Shri Sanjeev Malhotra, CEO, IOT Centre of 
Excellence, NASSCOM 
• Shri Premkumar  Seshadri, HCL Info systems 
• Prof. Vijay Chandru, Co-Founder,  
Strand Life Sciences 
• Prof. Anil Gupta, National Innovation 
Foundation 
• Dr. H. Purushottam, CMD, National Research 
Development Corporation 
• Dr. SK Sarin,  Director, ILBS
• Prof. Supriyo Mitra, Dean, IISER Kolkata 
• Dr. Vijay Bhatkar,  Chancellor, Nalanda 
University 
• Shri Sudesh Menon, WaterLife
• Shri Pradeep Mehta, Head Finance & Legal, 
Finance & Legal F/A Technology
• Shri Amit Mishra, GM, Piramal Water Pvt. Ltd.
• Shri Shishir K. Jha. Asstt. Professor, IIT Bombay
Annex 2
This Annex provides a comprehensive list of outside experts and organizations consulted by the 
different verticals in NITI Aayog. Any omissions are inadvertent.
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
206
• Shri Chander Shekhar, SCI(G), ICMR, New Delhi
• Shri Arjun P . Gupta, Founder & CEO, (Energy 
Management), Smart Joules
Industry
• Shri Ajay Shankar, Former Secretary, 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
• Dr. Pankaj Chandra, Vice Chancellor, 
Ahmedabad University
• Shri Nakul Anand, Executive Director, ITC
• Shri Nirupam Srivastava, Vice President,  
Hero Enterprise
• Shri Mukhtarul Amin, Chairman, Council for 
Leather Exports
• Shri M.S. Unnikrishnan, Managing Director & 
CEO, Thermax India Pvt Ltd
• Shri Ajay Khanna, Chief, Strategic and Public 
Affairs, Jubiliant Bhartia Group
• Shri Ankur Kanaglekar, Director, Boeing India
• Shri Anup Rai, SMCC Construction India Ltd.
• Shri Samir Advani, Rafael India
• Shri K K Gupta, Vice President, L&T Construction
• Shri Salhotra Bharat, Managing Director of 
Alstom India Limited
• Shri Madhu S Nair, CMD, Cochin Shipyard Ltd
• Shri Parameshwaran Nath, Director, PayPal 
Payments
• Shri Praveen Shankar Pandya,  Chairman, The 
Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council
Doubling Farmers’ Income
• Dr. Punjab Singh, President National Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Pusa New Delhi
• Dr. P . K. Joshi, IFPRI-South Asia Office, Pusa, 
New Delhi
• Dr. P . G. Chengappa, Forcer Vice-Chancellor, 
University of Agricultural Sciences
• Dr. Sukhpal Singh, Professor, IIM, Ahmedabad
• Shri Ashish Bahuguna, Chairperson, FSSAI, FDA 
Bhawan, New Delhi
• Dr Gopal Krishna, Director & VC, Central 
Institute for Fisheries Education, Mumbai
• Dr. S. Shivkumar, Chief Executive of the Agri 
Business Division, ITC Kolkata
• Shri H K Bhanwala, Chairman & Managing  
Director, NABARD, Mumbai
• Shri Satish Chander, Director General, Fertilizer 
Association of India, New Delhi 
• Dr. R. S. Sodhi, Managing Director,  
Gujarat Co-operative Milk Federation Ltd.
• Shri Raghunath Dada Patil, President, 
Maharashtra State Shetkari Sangathan, Sangli, 
Maharashtra
• Shri Anil Kumar Sahni, Tigra Farm
• Shri Mayank Jalan, Keventer Agro Limited
• Shri Sudesh Menon, Water Life
• Shri Sudhir Mehta, Pinnacle Industries Limited.
• Shri Rahul Mirchandani, Aries Agro Limited.
• Shri Nikhil Nanda, Escorts Ltd.
• Ms. Priya Nair, Hindustan Unilever
207
• Shri Pritam Shah, Parag Milk Foods
• Shri Pravesh Sharma, Former Managing 
Director, Small Farmers’ Agribusiness 
Consortium
• Dr. S K Goel, Former Additional Chief Secretary, 
Agriculture, Cooperation and  Marketing, 
Government of Maharashtra
• Shri Gokul Patnaik, Global Agri System,  
New Delhi
Travel, Tourism and Hospitality
• Dr. (Mrs) C.T . Misra, Secretary, General, INTACH
• Shri Deep Kalra, CEO, Make My Trip
• Shri Ritesh Agarwal, CEO, Oyo Rooms
• Shri Vishesh Chandiok, CEO, Grant Thornton 
India LLP
• Shri Dipak Deva, Travel Corporation of India
• Shri Kapil Chopra, Oberoi Hotels
• Shri Arjun Sharma, MD, World Travel & Tourism 
Council (WTTC)
• Shri Manan Thadan, MD, HVS
• Ms. Priya Paul, Chairperson, Apeejay Surrendra 
Park Hotel
• Shri Vivian Peres, Director, Ventours Int.  
Pvt. Ltd.
• Shri Sujay Chouhan, Ocean Blue
• Shri Dhruv Shrangi, CEO Yatra Online, Inc
• Ms. Jyotsana Suri, CMD Bharat Hotels 
• Shri Sunil Munjal, Chairman Hero Enterprises
• Shri Ratish Nanda, Aga Khan Trust
• Shri Ranjan Mathur, MD Top Travels
• Shri Ajeet Bajaj, MD, Snow leopard Adventure
• Shri Aman Nath, MD & CEO, Neemrana Heritage
• Shri Joseph Dominic, CGH Earth Experience 
Hotels
• Shri Ashish Phookan, MD, Assam Bengal 
Navigation 
• Shri Rahul Bhatia, MD, Indigo
• Ms. Aparajita Jain, Nature Morte
Minerals
• Prof. Durga Charan Panigrahi, Indian School of 
Mines, Dhanbad
• Shri S.Vijay Kumar, Former Secretary (Mines), 
TERI
• Prof. S.K.Sharma, Head, Department of Mining 
Engineering, IIT-BHU
• Shri Vijay Iyer, Managing Director, Rio Tinto
• Dr. V .N.Vasudev, Senior Geologist, Consultant
• Shri Sunil Duggal, CEO & Managing Director, 
Hindustan Zinc Limited, Vedanta Resources
• Shri Rahul Baldota, Jt. Managing Director, M/s. 
Ramgad Minerals & Mining Limited
• Shri Anjani Agarwal, Ernst & Young
• Shri Saradchandra Rao Peshwa, Director, 
Deccan Exploration Services Private Limited
• Shri Rajeev Singhal, Vice President, Tata Steel
• Shri Tuhin Mukherjee, Managing Director, FICCI
• Prof. Raman Srikanth, NIAS
• Shri R.K.Sharma, Secretary, FIMI
• Shri Arun Kumar Kothari, President Mining 
Engineers Association of India
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
208
• Shri Upendra Kumar, Member, CII
• Shri Akshaydeep Mathur,  Secretary General, 
Federation of Mining Association of Rajasthan
Energy
• Shri Kirit S. Parikh, IRADE
• Director (Exploration and Production), Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation
• Shri R.V . Shahi, Ex-Secretary, MOP
• Shri Ajay Mathur, The Energy & Resources 
Institute
• Shri Tulsi Tanti, Chairman and Managing 
Director, Suzlon
• Shri Chetan S. Solanki, IIT Bombay
• Shri Vipul Tuli, CEO, Cemcorp Industries Limited
• Shri Rahul Tongia, Ph.D.Fellow, Brookings India
• Shri Sumant Sinha, ReNew Power
• Shri Ajay Khandelwal, President, Exploration 
and Production, Reliance Petroleum
• Shri Shantanu Dixit, PRAYAS Energy Group
• Shri Anshu Bhardwaj, CSTEP
• Shri Deepak Gupta, Shakti Sustainable Energy 
Foundation
• Shri Tarun Sawhney, Triveni Group
• Shri Anil Sardana, CEO & MD, Tata Power
• Shri U.C. Muktibodh, Director, Technical, NPCIL
• Shri Anil Kumar Chalamalasetty, MD, Greenko
• Shri Pramod Chaudhari, Chairman, Praj 
Industries Limited, Praj Group
• Shri Alla Ayodhya Rami Reddy, Chairman, 
Ramky Group
• Head, Research Division, CRISIL
• Shri H.N. Sharan, Founder Desi Power
• Shri Tejpreet, Bharat Light and Power
• Director, The Energy and Resources Institute
• Prof. Ashok Jhunjhunwala, IIT Madras
• Shri R. K Srivastava, ED-NETRA
• Dr. Markus Braunsperger, CTO, Hero Moto Corp
• Shri Rajan Wadhera, Mahindra and Mahindra
• Dr. Rajan Rawal, CEPT University
• Chairman, Alliance for an Energy Efficient 
Economy (AEEE)
• Dr. Anurabha Ghosh, CEO, Council on Energy, 
Environment and Water
• Ms. Priyavrat Bhati, Director, Centre for Science 
and Environment
• Shri Shantanu Dixit, Group Coordinator, PRAYAS 
(Energy Group)
• Group Head (Energy Management), National 
Productivity Council
• Chief Engineer, Smart Grid Project Gurgoan
• Shri A.K Asthana, Sr.Technical Expert, GIZ India
• Shri Puneet Dalmia, MD, Dalmiya Bharat Group
• Shri Arjun Gupta, Smart Joules Pvt Ltd.,
• Shri Arindam Paul, Atom berg Technologies Pvt 
Ltd. 
• Shri Rangan Banerjee, HOD, Department of 
Energy Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay
• Shri Manit Rastogi, Founder Partner, 
Morphogenesis
• Shri Shubhreet Barmer, Sr. lighting Application 
Specialist, Philips lighting India Ltd. 
209
• Shri Kaushik Sanyal, HOD-Business Service 
Group, Tata Power Distribution Ltd  
Surface Transport, Railways, Civil 
Aviation, Ports, Shipping and 
Inland Waterways, Logistics
• Shri Kapil Kaul, Centre for aviation
• Shri Ranjit S. Walia, Managing Counsel, Walia 
& Co
• Shri G. Raghuram, Director, IIM Bangalore 
• Shri Afaq Hussain, Director, Bureau of Research 
on Industry & Economic Fundamentals 
• Dr. G. V . R. Shastri, Coastal India Development 
Council
• Shri Anoop Kumar Sharma, Indian National Ship 
Owners Association
• Capt. I. V . Solanki
• Shri Umesh Grover, Secretary General, 
Container Freight Station Association of India 
• Capt. Ashwani Nayar, Hind Terminals Pvt. Ltd.
• Dr. Mahesh Reddy, Infrastructure Industry & 
Logistics Federation of India
• Shri K. Janardan Rao, MD, Indian Port 
Association 
• Shri Akshima T Ghate, Fellow, TERI
• Shri R. N. Malik, Professor, Manav Rachna 
University 
• Prof. Sudhir Mishra, Professor, IIT Kanpur 
• Shri D.P . Gupta, Asian Institude of Transport 
Development
• Shri Sachin Bhanushali, Director & CEO, 
GatewayRail 
• Shri Jaspal Singh, Consultant, International 
Association of Public Transport )
• Dr. Ravindra Kumar, Principal Scientist, Central 
Road Research Institute
• Shri Vinod Vasudevan, Assistant Professor, IIT 
Kanpur  
• Shri Gopal Patil, Associate Professor, IIT Bombay
• Shri Seema Sharma, IIT Delhi
• Dr. Sewa Ram, SPA, Delhi
• Shri Sunil Sherlekar, Chairman and CEO, 
Sankhyasutra, Bangalore
• Shri Partha Mukhopadaya, Senior Fellow, Centre 
for Policy Research
• Ms. Rupali Ghanekar, Economic Adviser, Indian 
National Ship Owners Association
• Dr. Kulwant Singh, UN Habitat
• Shri Amitabh Verma, Ex IAS 
• Shri Dhiraj Mathur, PWC
• Shri Manish Sharma, PWC
• Shri Clay Stranger, RMI
• Shri Kartike Karwal, Associate Director, SIAM
Smart Cities for Urban 
Transformation and Modernizing 
City Governance for Urban 
Transformation 
• Dr. Chetan Vaidya, Former Director, School of 
Planning and Architecture, New Delhi
• Shri Srikanth Vidwanathan, CEO, Janaagraha, 
Bangalore
• Dr. Jagan Shah, Director, National Institute of 
Urban Affairs, New Delhi
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
210
• Dr. O. P . Agarwal, Ex-OSD, Urban Transport, WRI
• Ms. Shreya Gadepalli, South Asia Director, 
Institute for Transport and Development Policy
• Dr. Renu Khosla, Director, Centre for Urban and 
Regional Excellence, New Delhi 
• Dr. Suresh Kumar Rohilla, Centre for Science 
and Environment, New Delhi
• Dr. Rajesh Tandon, Founder and President, 
Participatory Research in India
• Shri Parth Mukhopadhyay, Senior Fellow, Centre 
for Policy Research
• Prof. Shreekant Gupta, Delhi School of 
Economics
• Dr. Debolina Kundu, National Institute of Urban 
Affairs 
Housing for All and Swachh Bharat 
Mission 
• Shri Ravindra Singh, IAS (Retired), Former 
Secretary to Government of India
• Shri H.P . Prakash, Secretary & Commissioner, 
RWS & SD, Government of Karnataka
• Ms.  Asha Kapur Mehta, Professor, IIPA,  
New Delhi
• Shri P Sivaram, Professor & Head, CRI&CFL, 
NIRDPR, Rajendra Nagar, Hyderabad
• Shri Munish Gupta, Member, FICCI, National 
Committee on S&T and Innovation, New Delhi
• Shri Chandrakant Raipat, CMD, Rameshwaram 
Projects, Pvt. Ltd., Ranchi
• Shri Samirendra Chatterjee, Exec. President, 
SULABH INTERNATIONAL, New Delhi
• Shri Mahesh Babu, MD, IL & FS Environment, 
New Delhi
• Shri Ravi Shroff,  Executive Director, Excel 
Industries Ltd., Mumbai
• Shri Kartikeya Nitin Desai, Executive Director, 
ASHA Impact, New Delhi
• Shri Ashok K Agarwal, CEO, ESSEL Infra Projects 
Ltd., Mumbai
• Shri Subhash Chandra Vashisth, Director - 
SVAYAM, Jindal Saw Ltd., New Delhi
• Shri Sandip Dutt, GM, Jindal Ecopolis,  
New Delhi
• Shri Shreekanth Sreenivasan, Head -Business 
Development, KEF Holdings, Bengaluru
Water Resources
• Dr. A.K. Gosain, Professor IIT Delhi 
• Dr. Deepak Khare, IIT Roorkee
• A.B.Pandya, Secretary General, International 
Commission on Irrigation & Drainage
• Dr. Arvind Kumar, India Water Foundation
Sustainable Environment
• Dr. P . K. Khosala,VC, Shoolini  University
• Shri Vipin Chaudhary, DDG, ICFRE, Dehradun
• Shri Ajay Shankar, Former  Secretary to 
Government, TERI, New Delhi
• Shri Jaison Varghese, Programme Officer, CEE, 
New Delhi
• Shri Shikhar Jain, Pr. Counselor, Confederation 
of Indian Industry, New Delhi
• Shri Ram  Muivah, Secretary North-Eastern 
Council, Shilong
211
• Shri George C. Varughese, President, 
Development Alternatives
• Prof.  Manmohan yadav, Professor, IIFM, Bhopal
• Shri Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO,  
WWF-India
School Education
• Dr. Dhir Jhingran, Language and Learning 
Foundation
• Ms. Seema Bansal, Boston Consulting Group
• Prof. Venita Kaul, CECED
• Prof. Neelam Sood, On behalf of NUEPA
• Shri Amit Kaushik, Australian Council for 
Educational Research (India)
• Shri Shailendra Sharma, On behalf of Pratham
• Prof. Padma Sarangapani, TISS
• Ms. Jayshree Oza
• Prof. Poonam Agrawal, On behalf of NCERT
• Dr. Vineeta Sirohi, NUEPA
• Ms. Deepa Sankar
• Shri Bikkrama Daulet Singh, On behalf of 
Central Square Foundation
• Shri Raj Gilda, Lend-a-Hand India
• Ms. Renu Seth, On behalf of Pratham Second 
Chance
• Ms. Aparna Bijapurkar, On behalf of BCG
• Ms. Jyotsana Jha, Centre for Budget and Policy 
Studies
Higher Education 
• Prof. Furqan Qamar, AIU
• Prof. Sudhanshu Bhushan, NUEPA
• Shri Pramath Raj Sinha, Ashoka University
Teacher Education and Training 
• Dr. Santhosh Mathew, NCTE
• Prof. Hrushikesh Senapaty, NCERT
• Prof. Pranati Panda, NUEPA
• Ms. Indu Prasad, On behalf of Azim Premji 
University
• Shri Hriday Kant Diwan
• Prof. Disha Nawani, TISS Mumbai
Skill Development
• Director General, CII
• Secretary General, FICCI
• Vocational Training & Skill Development 
Specialist, ILO
Public Health Management and 
Action, Comprehensive Primary 
Health Care, Human Resources for 
Health, Universal Health Coverage
• Dr. M.K Bhan, IIT Delhi
• Ms. Sandhya Venkateswaran, BMGF
• Dr. T Jacob John, (Retired) Christian Medical 
College Vellore TN Child Health FDN
• Shri NK Arora, The INCLEN Trust International
• Ms. Shamika Ravi, Brookings India
• Shri Anjan Bose, NATHEALTH
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
212
• Shri Rajesh Kumar, PGIMER School of Public 
Health Chandigarh
• Ms. Sarojini, Sarna
• Shri Yogesh Jain, Jan Swasthya Sahyog Village 
PO Gramyan Bilaspur CG
• Dr. Henk Bekedam, WHO
• Dr. Subhash Salunke, PHFI
• Shri Sanjay Zodpay, PHFI
• Shri Jorge Coarasa, World Bank
• Shri Priyanka Saksona, WHO India
• Shri Chandrakant Lahariya, WHO India  
NPO-UHL
• Dr. Arvind Kasaragod, Director Medical 
Services, India Cloudnine Hospitals
• Ms. Anjula Solanky, Director, CII
Nutrition 
• Shri D.S. Swaminathan, ICMR
• Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, MWCD
• Shri Gulshan, MWCD
• Shri Raj Kumar Bhandari, Poshan
• Dr. Ajay Khera, MoHFW
• Ms. Manjula Singh, CIFF
• Ms. Rekha Sinha, Intemadonal Institute of Life 
Sciences
• Dr. Basanta Kumar Kar, Coalition for Food and 
Nutrition Security
• Ms. Naiyya Saggi, Babychakra
• Dr. B. Sesikaran, NIN
• Ms. Deepika Srivastava, Expert
• Shri C.S. Pandav, ICC
• Dr. J.H. Panwal, MWCD
• Dr. Kapil Yadav, AIIMS
• Dr. Anju Sinha 
• Dr. Arun Gupta, BPNI
• Shri Amod Kanth, Prayas
• Ms. Gayatri Singh, UNICEF
• Dr. Rasmi Avula, CGIAR
• Dr. Deepika Chaudhury, World Bank
• Dr. Satish B. Agnihotri, IIT
• Shri Sameer Maheshwari, Healthkart
• Ms. Esha Saraswat, IFPRI
• Ms. Arkalina Dwibedi, FSSAI
• Dr. A.C. Mishra, FSSAI
• Shri Sumit Aggarwal, ICMR
• Dr. M K Bhan, AIIMS
Gender
• Ms. Sanchita Mitra, SEWA
• Dr. Kiran Sharma, WHO
• Dr. Seema Arora, CII
• Dr. Neeta Pradhan, CII
• Ms. Rehana Riyawala, SEWA
• Ms. Kapilaben, SEWA
• Prof. Pam Rajput, Women’s Resource & 
Advocacy Centre
• Dr. Ratna Sudarshan, Institute of Social Studies 
Trust
• Prof. Mary E John, Centre for Women’s 
Development Studies
213
• Ms. Suneeta Dhar, Jagori
• Prof. Ravinder Kaur, IIT Delhi
• Ms. Ena Singh, UNFPA
• Ms. Shobhana Boyle, UNFPA
• Prof. Bina Agarwal, Economist
• Ms. Diya Nanda, UN Women
Social Inclusion
• Justice Shri Eshwaraiah, Former Chairman 
National Commission for Backward Classes
• Dr. Sham Singh Shashi, Former DG 
Information & Broadcasting, Visiting Professor 
Anthropology& Sociology Media and 
Journalism, Hindi, IGNOU
• Dr. Tanweer Fazal, Associate Professor, 
Associate Professor Center for the Study on 
Social Systems, Jawahara Lal Nehru University 
• Dr. R.R. Prasad, Rtd. Professor, Centre for 
exclusion & Inclusive studies, NIRD, Hyderabad
• Prof. G.G. Wankhede, Former Professor (TISS)
• Prof. Anita Julka, Department of Education of 
Groups with Special Needs, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training 
• Dr. Siddhartha Sarkar, Principal & Executive 
Head, Ananda Chandra College of Commerce, 
Jalpaiguri 
• Shri Javed Abidi, Director, National Centre for 
Promotion of Employment for Disabled People 
(NCPEDP) & founder of the Disability Rights 
Group
• Shri Nipun Malhotra, Co-founder and CEO, 
Nipman Foundation 
• Dr. Aloka Guha
• Shri G.B. Panda, Former Senior Adviser, 
Backward Castes Division, Planning 
Commission
• President / Secretary, Bharatiya Adim Jati Sevak 
Sangh
• Shri Ashif Shaikh, Director, Jan Sahas Social 
Development Society
• Shri R.C. Durga
• Ms. Ruth Manorama 
• The Secretary, National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes
• The Secretary, National Commission for 
Scheduled Tribes
• The Secretary, National Commission for Safai 
Karmacharies
• The Secretary, National Commission for 
Minorities
• The Member Secretary, National Commission 
for Denotified, Nomadic & Semi-Nomadic Tribes
• The Secretary, National Commission for 
Backward Classes
• The CEO and Joint Secretary, National Trust
The North-East Region
• Shri Chandan Mahanta, Dean, IIT , Guwahati
• Prof. Sachin Chaturvedi, DG, RIS
• Shri Amitabha De, IIM, Shillong
• Prof. Milindo Chakrabarti, Visiting Fellow, RIS
• Shri R.S.C. Jayraj, Director, Rain Forest Renewal 
Institute
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
214
Legal, Judicial and Police Reforms 
• Shri Suresh Chandra, Secretary Law, Ministry of 
Law & Justice
• Prof. S. Sivakumar, Member, Law Commission 
of India
• Ms. Anupama Nilekar Chandra, Inspector 
General, BPR & D
• Shri Amod Kanth, Founder, Prayas Institute of 
Juvenile Justice & Chairman DWSSC
• Shri Shekhar Gupta, Founder, The Print
Civil Services Reforms
• Shri Shyam Bang, Chairman NABCB
• Dr. Sanjeevan Bajaj, CEO FICCI Quality Forum
• Shri P . K. Tripathi, EO & Additional Secretary, 
DoPT
• Ms. Vasudha Mishra, Additional Secretary, 
DARPG
• Shri B. S. Baswan, Former Chairman UPSC 
Committee on Civil Services Examinations
• Prof. Dolly Arora, IIPA, New Delhi
Optimizing the Use of Land 
Resources
• Shri Prabhat Kumar Sharma  
Strategy for 
New India @ 75
216

